Learning risk culture of banks using news analytics European Journal of Operational Research 277 (2019) 770783 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect European Journal of Operational Research journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ejor Interfaces with Other Disciplines Learning risk culture of banks using news analytics Arvind Agarwal a , Aparna Gupta b , c , 1 , , Arun Kumar a , Srikanth G. Tamilselvam a a IBM Research Lab, Delhi, India b Lally School of Management, RPI, Troy, NY, USA c US Securities and Exchange Commission, Washington DC, USA a r t i c l e i n f o Article history: Received 16 December 2017 Accepted 22 February 2019 Available online 27 February 2019 Keywords: Analytics Banking Financial crisis Regulations Risk governance a b s t r a c t Risk culture is arguably a leading contributor to risk outcomes of a firm. We define risk culture indica- tors based on unstructured news data to develop a qualitative assessment of risk culture of banks. For US banks participating in an annual stress test program, we conduct a supervised learning ridge regres- sion analysis to identify the most significant features to evaluate banks risk culture characteristics. These features are used for unsupervised clustering to determine the high to low quality of risk culture. The dis- tinct groups obtained from clustering define and allow monitoring changes in the quality of risk culture in banks.  2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. v e r s c B a s t r m d t a m B l q 1. Introduction The 2008 global financial crisis increased concerns regarding the risk management practices of banks and their broader impli- cations. The increasingly complex banking system poses an enor- mous regulatory challenge in terms of controlling banking risk and maintaining stability of the financial system. Specifically, the complexity of the banking system arises from two sources, the tighter connection among banks and the increasing size and orga- nizational complexity of individual banks. The increasing size and complexity of banks also makes the risk of individual banks more opaque. Regulatory changes, such as the 2010 DoddFrank Act in the US and the US Federal Reserves Stress Test program, were in- tended to improve financial stability. The increasing opacity, however, can impede timely regula- tory intervention ( Gallemore, 2013 ), unless the regulators have im- proved tools to monitor and supervise banks risks. We conjecture that to regulate the banking system well, only monitoring hard structured data is far from enough; unstructured textual data from  Corresponding author at: Lally School of Management, RPI, Troy, NY, USA. E-mail addresses: arvagarw@in.ibm.com (A. Agarwal), guptaa@rpi.edu (A. Gupta), kkarun@in.ibm.com (A. Kumar), srikanth.tamilselvam@in.ibm.com (S.G. Tamilsel- vam). 1 The Securities and Exchange Commission, as a matter of policy, disclaims re- sponsibility for any private publication or statements by any of its employees. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Commission or of the authors colleagues on the staff of the Commis- sion; This work was supported in part by NSF Award III-1738895. c fi t y t r s s https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2019.02.045 0377-2217/ 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. arious sources can provide valuable complementary insights. We xplore this in this paper. Besides ensuring that banks follow the egulatory rules to control their risk exposures, supervision of the pirit of corporate governance of banks can help address the root ause of the problem. As pointed out by the Financial Stability oard (FSB), a more intense and effective approach to oversight ims to deliver pre-emptive, rather than reactive, outcomes-based upervision ( FSB, 2014; Glazer & Rexrode, 2016 ). Treating opera- ional losses as independent events, as most banks currently do, esembles treating the symptoms of a disease rather than the alaise itself ( Chernobai, Jorion, & Yu, 2012; Drennan, 2004 ). A common element affecting the risk taking behaviors of in- ividuals and groups in a financial institution is its risk cul- ure ( Glazer & Rexrode, 2016 ). While obtaining appropriate data nd measuring banks risk culture is difficult, developing ways to easure, monitor and study risk culture is a worthwhile endeavor. esides the quantitative financial statements reported to the regu- ators, there is significant textual content in reports banks are re- uired to file with the regulators. Additionally, print news media reates large volumes of text providing information on banking, of nancial and/or business interest, to general public. These qualita- ive and unstructured data can complement the quantitative anal- sis of bank risk-taking for assessing risk culture of banks. In this paper, we utilize a large volume of print news data o identify a set of meaningful indicators for evaluating a banks isk culture. We particularly focus on the period of Federal Re- erve stress tests and consider banks that have participated in the tress test program. Following a specific risk culture framework, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2019.02.045 http://www.ScienceDirect.com http://www.elsevier.com/locate/ejor http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.ejor.2019.02.045&domain=pdf mailto:arvagarw@in.ibm.com mailto:guptaa@rpi.edu mailto:kkarun@in.ibm.com mailto:srikanth.tamilselvam@in.ibm.com https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2019.02.045 A. Agarwal, A. Gupta and A. Kumar et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 277 (2019) 770783 771 w c e f o r s t t fi o t m 2 i t a A a c p h c c a b a o t c a o p a F M c b F r C o w h o p m p i s c t g S 2 O t t i fi a d m e S m w n t i s B ( k Z c t i m a & S ( a 2 c o a o t t r n a w s e m D o c t m t f p w a t c m p h i 2 t f m u m c t ( 2 e L e investigate how the risk culture of this group of banks has hanged over the stress testing period. We build a feasible way to xtract the risk culture indicators (RCI) from these textual sources or applying the risk culture framework to the banks. Using a set f proxy target variables, we conduct a supervised learning based isk culture features selection for the banks. Thereafter, in an un- upervised assessment, we analyze the groups the banks belong o over time according to the chosen risk culture indicators. Given hat the Feds stress test program must help strengthen public con- dence in the nations banking system, evaluation of the evolution f banks risk culture from news data assesses the effectiveness of he program in improving public confidence. A rigorous definition of risk culture is essential to build any easure for it. The International Institute of Finance (IIF) ( IIF, 009 ) defines risk culture as the norms and traditions of behav- or of individuals and of groups within an organization that de- ermine the way in which they identify, understand, discuss, and ct on the risks of the organization, and the risks it takes ( Power, shby, & Palermo, 2013 ). Researchers emphasize that both external nd internal analysis are necessary to fully evaluate a banks risk ulture ( McConnell, 2013 ). Risk culture literature has progressed on two themes, rescriptive and empirical. In the prescriptive thread, researchers ave focused on aspects of a firm that should be reflected in the onceptualization of its risk culture, namely what is good risk ulture and how to build it in a firm. McConnell (2013) introduced framework with six key drivers reflecting managers values and ehavior, management system and employees activities. Geretto nd Pauluzzo (2015) emphasized the values, norms, and practices f the members of an organization that contribute to the organiza- ions risk culture. Sheedy, Griffin, and Barbour (2015) identify four ommon factors for risk climate: values, managers, proactivity, nd avoidance, and IIF (2009) provided four essential elements f successful risk culture. Power et al. (2013) warn of destructive athways that the Financial Stability Board (FSB) should pay ttention to when promoting risk culture ( Ashby, 2014 ). Based on ritz-Morgenthal et al.s rigorous risk culture framework ( Fritz- orgenthal, Hellmuth, & Packham, 2016 ), our identification of risk ulture will take into consideration the detailed features proposed y the studies and the considerations for soundness of risk culture. irm culture and its broader influence on corporate decisions and elation with corporate governance has been investigated ( Bae, hang, & Kang, 2012 ). We are specifically interested in its influence n risk decisions. In empirical studies of risk culture, researchers have discussed hether risk culture is measurable and reportable, what factors ave an impact on risk culture, and the relation of risk culture to ther quantitative and qualitative metrics. Palermo et al. (2015) ex- lore the unique features of risk culture extractable from existing aterials, such as, documents from websites of consulting firms, rofessional associations and rating agencies ( Gherardi & Nicol- ni, 20 0 0; Law & Singleton, 2005 ). Other researchers have de- igned questionnaires to collect data and calculate organizational ulture score and risk culture score. Kimbrough and Compona- ion (2009) measured the organizational culture by using the Or- anizational Culture Assessment (OCA) score. Based on Burns and talkers ( Burns & Stalker, 1961 ) model, the OCA score contains 0 brief questions designed by Kimbrough and Componation. The CA score is claimed to measure whether the organizational cul- ure is mechanistic or organic. The Macquarie University Risk Cul- ure Scale designs a questionnaires for the risk culture score us- ng four factors, namely, whether risk management is valued in the rm, whether risk issues and events are proactively identified and ddressed, whether risk issues and policy breaches are ignored, ownplayed or excused, and finally, whether immediate manage- ent response is implemented ( Sheedy & Griffin, 2014 ). From the above summary of research on risk culture, it is vident that research on risk culture has significant challenges. ince the beginning of the Internet era, huge amounts of docu- ents, comments and discussions are available as text from the orld wide web. Taking advantage of these textual data in the fi- ance domain is a valuable pursuit. A large fraction of work in he application of text mining in finance has been on predict- ng price movement of stocks and other market variables. For in- tance, Alfano, Feuerriegel, and Neumann (2015) , Tai, Olson, and lessner (2016) , Antweiler and Frank (2004) and Wuthrich et al. 1998) use news articles to predict the stock market or FOREX mar- et. Serrano and Iglesias (2016) , Nguyen, Shirai, and Velcin (2015) , hang, Swanson, and Prombutr (2012) and Ranco et al. (2016) fo- us on analyzing social media text from platforms such as Twit- er, stock message boards and Yahoo!Finance message board, for mplementing market prediction. Besides market prediction, text ining is also implemented for measuring financial condition, such s firm performance ( Balakrishnan, Qiu, & Srinivasan, 2010; Tsai Wang, 2017 ), credit rating prediction ( Mengelkamp, Hobert, & chumann, 2015; Tsai, Lu, & Hung, 2010 ), bank distress prediction Iturriaga & Sanz, 2015; Rnnqvist & Sarlin, 2015a; 2015b; 2017 ) nd systemic risk measurement ( Lischinsky, 2011; Nyman et al., 015; Tai et al., 2016 ). Application of sentiment analysis and text mining in finance onstitutes a rapidly growing literature ( Liu, 2012; Mntyl, Grazi- tin, & Kuutila, 2018; Nassirtoussi, Aghabozorgi, Wah, & Ngo, 2014 ), nd essentially involves a few key steps. Feature extraction meth- ds determine how researchers collect useful qualitative informa- ion from textual data. The most popular method of feature ex- raction is the bag-of-words approach ( Alfano et al., 2015; Feuer- iegel, Wolff, & Neumann, 2015; Nguyen et al., 2015 ). This tech- ique breaks the text into word-level units, and treats these units s features, while ignoring the order and co-occurrence of the ords ( Nassirtoussi et al., 2014 ). Effort is then made to assign entiment to these extracted words, often by taking support of xtensive domain-specific dictionaries developed to assign senti- ents ( Bodnaruk, Loughran, & McDonald, 2015; Loughran & Mc- onald, 2011a; 2014 ). However, assigning sentiments based solely n presence of certain words has limitations, as this doesnt ac- ount of the context of the words, including presence of negations hat may completely reverse the meaning. Beyond bag-of-words ethods, more advanced supervised and unsupervised learning echniques are used to extract textual sentiments ( Liu, 2012 ). For eature extraction, Schumaker, Zhang, Huang, and Chen (2012) ap- ly a noun-phrase technique, in which they identify the words ith a noun part-of-speech (POS) by using a lexicon and then pply syntactic rules to detect noun phrases around that noun o extract features. Tsai, Wang, and Chien (2016) have applied a ontinuous bag-of-words approach, a continuous-space language odel, to discover finance words from firms annual reports to redict stock volatility, abnormal trading volume, etc. Researchers ave also implemented named entity recognition techniques to mprove the feature extraction results ( Vu, Chang, Ha, & Collier, 012 ). Rekabsaz et al. (2017) use word embedding-based informa- ion retrieval models for sentiment analysis of firm disclosures for orecasting stock volatility, along with combining with quantitative arket signals. After feature extraction from a corpus, text mining objective sually requires feature selection and application of a classification ethod to capture the required signal from the text. Various ma- hine learning algorithms are applied to analyze the features ex- racted; one common method used is the Support Vector Machine SVM) ( Chiang et al., 2015; Nassirtoussi, Aghabozorgi, Wah, & Ngo, 015; Nguyen et al., 2015 ). SVM is a non-probabilistic binary lin- ar classifier that finds a hyperplane that separates two classes. inear regression models are also used as a supervised learning 772 A. Agarwal, A. Gupta and A. Kumar et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 277 (2019) 770783 Table 1 Description of the Risk Culture Framework in terms of its seven Risk Culture Indi- cators (RCIs). Category Description Governance Qualifies if appropriate senior management to operate the business and an adequate supervisory authority to govern the bank are in place. Portfolio Evaluates selected balance sheet related figures considered as relevant indicators for the quality of a banks risk culture. Risk strategy Emphasizes appropriate risk governance, processes and personnel being in place and how the different risks are managed as relevant to a specific bank. Regulatory requirement Level of compliance with regulatory requirements related to risk management. Employees Measures average training hours completed by employees and employee retention. Work Culture Behavioral indicators and attitudes identifiable. Reputation Banks statements made regarding their reputation and related threats or risks, where litigations and their transparent disclosure is considerd. p u a t fl e n b b e r t h t r r w f o s s 2 ( c n r g d B t a W t o t p T r n a technique ( Chatrath, Miao, Ramchander, & Villupuram, 2014 ). Additionally, Naive Bayes ( Li, 2010 ) and Decision Rules or Trees ( Rachlin, Last, Alberg, & Kandel, 2007 ) methods are also fre- quently used. These text mining methods build the basis of the methodology used in this paper for the purpose of risk culture identification of a bank. The textual data is obtained from a large corpus of news articles in order to develop an objective, text analytics based risk culture assessment framework. We define features based on sen- timent analysis applied to news articles that discuss topics related to a banks risk culture. The sentiment assessment allows assigning a quality indication on each of the risk culture indicators. As we dont expect Federal Reserve Banks annual stress testing scores to be perfect predictor of banks risk culture, we use these scores as target variables to guide the identification of the most significant features. To further learn the banks risk culture, we use the most significant features in an unsupervised clustering analysis to iden- tify banks that group together by similar feature characteristics. We observe that quality of banks portfolio and reputation emerge as the most important risk culture indicators, followed by banks strategy and employee characteristics. Considering yearly risk culture features extracted from each years news articles corresponding to the banks participating in the Feds stress test program allows us to examine how the risk culture changed in the banks through the years of stress testing. Even though the DoddFrank stress tests are a regulatory initiative, strategy, employee characteristics and reputation emerge as more important textual features than regulatory requirements, when us- ing the stress test scores for supervised learning. The banks fall in clearly defined three clusters for their quality of risk culture, from high, medium to low quality. Although a large group of banks initially fall in the low quality risk culture group, they improve their status over the years. There are a modest number of banks in the medium and high quality groups. Matching features by stress testing years allows examining risk culture group transitions. We observe several transitions, some displaying improvement in risk culture, while others showing a deterioration. Therefore, these dif- ferentiated classes of banks may indicate a risk culture score for banks above and beyond the stress test results. Rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next sec- tion, we present the risk culture framework used in this paper, along with describing the data sources and text extraction meth- ods used. Section 3 describes the supervised and unsupervised ma- chine learning methods used to identify the most significant fea- tures for risk culture identification and clustering banks by their risk culture characteristics. Section 4 presents the results and dis- cusses our findings. Final remarks are provided in the conclusions section. 2. Risk culture framework Among earliest definitions of risk culture, Bozeman and Kings- ley (1998) defined risk culture as the organizations propensity to take risks as perceived by the managers in the organization, which emphasizes the risk appetite of managers. In more recent years, the concept of risk culture has been discussed in context of banks ( Geretto & Pauluzzo, 2015 ), financial regulators ( Gallemore, 2013 ), consultancy firms and insurers, however, it is considered hard to get a universally agreed upon definition of an organi- zations culture, and specifically, its risk culture. In this work, we closely follow the risk culture framework utilized in Fritz- Morgenthal et al. (2016) . We use the framework for identification of risk culture indicators, construction of a risk culture dictionary and develop a risk culture measure using unstructured data. The seven dimensional construct of the risk culture framework constitutes: (1) governance, (2) portfolio, (3) risk strategy, (4) em- loyees, (5) regulatory requirement, (6) work culture, and (7) rep- tation. Governance quality dictates the tone set by the top man- gement and firm-wide processes set in place to relay the tone hrough the firm. Portfolio refers to how the balance sheet re- ects the firms attitude and strategy towards risk appetite, risk xposure and management. Risk strategy emphasizes the gover- ance in place for risk decisions in the firm. The risk strategy must e consistent with the regulatory requirements imposed on the ank. No risk outcomes can be robust if the employees are not ad- quately prepared and trained, which is the next feature in the isk culture framework. In this regard, employee attrition or re- ention is also considered important. Employee experience, be- avior and incentives at all levels of organizational hierarchy of he firm define the work culture, which specifically relates to the isk culture of the firm. Finally, governance, risk strategy, adequate esponse to regulatory requirements, employee competency and ork culture feed into creating the reputation of the firm. There- ore, these seven dimensions holistically cover the characteristics f a firm that contribute to the firms risk culture. We will con- truct a dictionary and indicators by these dimensions in the next ection. .1. Risk culture indicators & dictionary To estimate the quality of risk culture, Fritz-Morgenthal et al. 2016) defined a number of risk culture indicators (RCIs) and dis- ussed their relationship with risk culture. We leverage these RCIs, amely regulatory requirement, governance, portfolio, employees, isk strategy, reputation and work culture for our systematic re- ression analysis for risk culture identification of banks. A brief escription of these risk culture indicators is provided in Table 1 . ased on the additional discussion of risk culture in the litera- ure ( Bowman, 1984; Mihet, 2013; Power et al., 2013 ), we identify set of words that represent each of the risk culture indicators. e use these RCI keywords as seed words to expand the RCI dic- ionary based on their synonyms. We identify co-occurring words f these seed words, such as, verbs like demand, report etc., from he news articles, and based on inputs from a subject matter ex- ert filter these co-occurring words for inclusion in the dictionary. his process helps finalize the complete set of keywords for the isk culture indicators. We refer to these keywords as the dictio- ary for the risk culture indicators. A sample of these keywords re summarized in the Appendix . A. Agarwal, A. Gupta and A. Kumar et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 277 (2019) 770783 773 Fig. 1. Pareto chart of the filtered article distribution for each of the bank in the years 20132016. Only articles that mention any of the RCIs keywords are considered. Table 2 Unique articles for banks considered discussing at least one of the RCIs. Year Unique articles 2013 40506 2014 29115 2015 29616 2 t s p N t f u fi b g c t t a t S p t f 2 n Table 3 Table discussing articles discussing upto 4 banks and the fre- quency of the appearing in the article and in the same sentence. Num banks Appear in the same article Appear in the same sentence 1 42977 42977 2 21633 10276 3 9258 4122 4 4248 1708 t o s t w a t o p w f p c o t m c a s s t c w a s .2. Dataset and data sources In this work, we aim to examine the risk culture indication ob- ainable from publicly available news resources for the financial in- titutions participating in the Feds annual stress tests. We utilize rint news data obtained from Reuters News Archive 2 for this task. ews articles from this resource in general discuss a wide range of opics, from politics, banking, sports, entertainment, etc. For our ocus on financial institutions and their risk culture, we restrict sing news data that identifies with banking related articles. We lter articles by whether the articles mention at least one of the anks included in our study, which are the banks that have under- one the Federal Reserves annual stress tests in the past years. A omplete list of banks is provided in the Appendix 3 . Table 2 shows he number of unique articles obtained for the years 20132015 hat mention at least one of the banks in our study group and risk culture indicator. This is identified by checking if the ar- icles contain any word(s) from the RCIs dictionary discussed in ection 2.1 . Federal Reserve Bank also makes annual stress test re- orts and test scores available for each of these banks. These stress est scores are utilized for supervised learning of the significant eatures for a risk culture assessment. .3. Sentiment analysis tools Occurrence of risk culture indicator keywords in news articles is ot sufficient for assessing the risk culture. We additionally need 2 Reuters News: http://www.reuters.com/resources/archive/us/ . 3 Fed stress list: https://www.raalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/dfa-stress-tests.htm . a g t o determine the sentiment associated with these occurrences in rder to judge the quality of reference to the risk culture discus- ion. Therefore, in each article, we seek out particular sentences hat contain one of the risk culture indicator keywords, sample of hich are listed in the Appendix . A sentence containing a keyword ssociated with a risk culture indicator is considered as a represen- ative for that indicator and a sentiment analysis is then performed n the sentence towards that risk culture indicator. In Fig. 1 , we lot the number of articles containing risk culture indicator key- ords for all the banks. We note that the total number of articles or the three years in this plot is much higher than the total re- orted in Table 2 . This is because Table 2 reports only unique arti- les that mention at least one of the banks along with at least one f the RCIs, however Fig. 1 can count an article as many times as he number of banks it mentions. A single article can contain infor- ation about more than one bank, therefore the article would get ounted in the tally of multiple banks. We also observe that most rticles, as shown in Table 3 , tend to discuss banks in the same entence. We generally expect a single sentence to convey a single entiment, which we attribute to the risk culture indicator for all he banks that are mentioned in the sentence. For the challenge of o-reference resolution of banks appearing in different sentences, e consider only those articles in which mention of all the banks ppears in the same sentence. This provides higher confidence for entiment attribution for multiple banks mentioned in an article nd their risk culture indication. Sentence segmentation refers to the process of splitting a iven paragraph of text into sentences, by identifying the sen- ence boundaries. In our case, a period punctuation is used to http://www.reuters.com/resources/archive/us/ https://www.raalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/dfa-stress-tests.htm 774 A. Agarwal, A. Gupta and A. Kumar et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 277 (2019) 770783 Table 4 Results comparing sentiments computed using IBM Alchemy and Loughran McDonald methods. Column 2 is the total number of sentences that discuss the indicator. Column 3 is the number of sentences where both methods agree on the sentiments (exact match) assigned. Column 4 captures percentage of exact matches. Column 5 provides information on approximate match, where neutral and positive are merged into one sentiment or neutral and negative are merged, and then only positive and negative sentiments are considered for identifying mismatches. Col- umn 6 provides the approximate match percentage. Category # Sentences # Exact match % Exact match # Approx. match % Approx. match Regulatory req 272430 143467 53% 253895 93% Governance 137112 60968 44% 122942 90% Portfolio 173465 103452 60% 163612 94% Employees 60466 28679 47% 55258 91% Risk strategy 156156 70494 45% 140683 90% Reputation 149812 71035 47% 134388 90% Work culture 19703 8415 43% 17192 87% s t k c m t p k w t  n o i c 3 i s o fi c p f u t t f s u R a t t R n I s a p b a a t m identify the end of a sentence. Abbreviations, such as U.S., are first stripped off their periods before sentence segmentation is ap- plied. For assigning a sentiment to every sentence associated with a risk culture indicator, among the different sentiment analysis tools available, we chose to use IBM Alchemy 4 for its industry-wide recognition and LoughranMcDonald Dictionary ( Loughran & Mc- Donald, 2011b ) for its popularity among finance researchers. IBM Alchemy uses advanced machine learning algorithms to learn lin- guistic attributes of news articles in order to assign sentiments to them. LoughranMcDonald dictionaries consist of negative and positive sentiment words (among others) that have been devel- oped with a focus on finance specific usage. If a sentence con- tains more than one sentiment word, a majority voting scheme is used to arrive at a single sentiment for the sentence. A posi- tive sentiment is assigned a value of +1, a negative sentiment a value  1, and a neutral is assigned a value 0. Unlike dictionary based methods, Alchemy provides a single sentiment value, i.e pos- itive/neutral/negative, for a sentence along with a confidence score. We performed sentiment analysis using both the methods and report a comparison of results at the sentence level in Table 4 . A strict agreement of negative/neutral/positive sentiments between the two methods ranges from 43% to 60% for all the risk culture indicators. However, if the neutral assignments are merged with positive or negative sentiments, the match agreement becomes uniformly above 87% (last column of Table 4 ). Therefore, there is significant agreement between the two sentiment assignment methods, especially strictly by positive/negative sentiments. A closer examination of the mis-matched cases is worthwhile. Towards this end, we conducted two experiments where we em- ployed subject matter experts to read the mis-matched sentences for a sentiment analysis and compared the outcomes with the as- signments by the two tools. In the first experiment, we took 100 sentences which were labeled as positive by LoughranMcDonald sentiment assignment but negative by Alchemy tools. In the second experiment, we considered 100 sentences that were labeled nega- tive by LoughranMcDonald assignment but positive by Alchemy. In the first case, we found Alchemy labels agreed with the hu- man judgment in 54% of the 100 sentences and in the second case, the agreement was 64%. With Alchemy being consistently closer to human evaluation, we chose Alchemy based sentiment assignment for our study. We observe that Alchemy is able to take the context of the key- words into consideration rather than attributing the sentiment of the entire sentence on a few words. However, IBM Alchemy has 4 https://www.ibm.com/watson/developercloud/alchemy-language.html . b t s ome drawbacks also. A couple of sentences with contrasting sen- iments from the two methods are presented below. Ukraines debt restructuring, pro-business Mauricio Macris elec- tion win in Argentina and hopes Venezuela will see something sim- ilar on Sunday, have seen a dramatic turnaround in investors at- titude toward all three countries. This sentence discusses the portfolio RCI associated with the eyword debt. IBM Alchemy identified this sentence, we believe orrectly, as bearing a positive sentiment, while dictionary based ethod identified it as carrying a negative sentiment because of he word restructure. An example where IBM Alchemy doesnt erform as well follows. Cash equities experienced an aggressive ramp at the close of Tues- days session, pushing the Nikkei above 20,0 0 0 points, but market participants said macro sentiment and risk appetite were cooled a little overnight by a slight strengthening of the yen against the dollar. This sentence discusses the strategy RCI associated with the eyword risk appetite. IBM Alchemy identified this sentence ith a negative sentiment, while dictionary based method iden- ified the sentence to have a positive sentiment due to the word strengthen. For the uncertainty expressed in the sentence, it is ot surprising that the two approaches pick a theme to conclude n the sentences sentiment. Using the features defined by the risk culture indicators qual- fied by their corresponding sentiments, we next present the risk ulture assessment methodologies. . Methodology for risk culture assessment A banks performance in the Feds stress tests can be a strong ndicator of the banks risk culture, however it can not be conclu- ively reliable for the banks risk culture identification. Therefore, ur approach to determining the risk culture of banks is based on rst applying a supervised regression model assessment of the risk ulture indicator sentiment features. This is followed by an unsu- ervised clustering of the banks by the important features selected rom the supervised learning. The supervised regression models se training data consisting of RCI features extracted from tex- ual data along with target values, which are the banks Fed stress est scores. This analysis guides us to identify significant textual eatures extracted from news data that strongly align with banks tress test performance. As discussed in the previous section, we se publicly available Reuters News Archives data for defining the CI feature space. A sentence level extraction from the relevant filtered articles re processed to assign a sentiment for each risk culture indica- or. The features thus defined combine the sentiment for each of he RCIs. As discussed in Section 2 , we use 7 RCIs, and for each CI, we associate three sentiment values, i.e. positive, negative and eutral. This gives us a final feature space containing 21 variables. n order to compute these feature values, we first identify the sub- et of articles associated with each bank, where an article may be ssociated with one or more banks. The filtered articles are then rocessed sentence by sentence, associating a sentence with an RCI ased on the presence of RCI keywords in the sentence. For ex- mple, if a sentence in an article contains a keyword Layoff , we ssociate this article with the RCI Employees . We determine the sentiment of the sentences and combine hem with the RCIs associated with the sentences. All the senti- ent values for all RCIs and all articles associated with a bank or ank-year are aggregated to compute the feature vector. These fea- ures from the training data act as predictor variables to learn the upervised regression models. The two chosen target variables for https://www.ibm.com/watson/developercloud/alchemy-language.html A. Agarwal, A. Gupta and A. Kumar et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 277 (2019) 770783 775 s t r i m t l a r t R a w a V ( o t r a 3 i d o t p f g a p a d t t b a X x o Y n e a e S t r a p d z i 2 g a o i u o a t o R m w i t o t t v f m w r  o o f r a u t R c s m s ( f b r u M a M T upervised learning are the metrics available from the Feds stress est results, namely Tier 1 capital ratio Ending and Tier 1 leverage atio Ending . These stress test metrics are provided for two scenar- os, the adverse scenario 5 and the severely adverse scenario 6 . Two etrics each for two adverse scenarios makes up for a total of 4 arget variables in the supervised learning. There are several possible models available in machine learning iterature for supervised learning. For our 21 RCI feature variables nd 4 target variables, we sought to find the best learning rep- esentation from among a range of model choices. We evaluated he following supervised learning regression model approaches: idge regression, Support Vector Ridge regression, Ridge Lasso, nd Random Forest regression. These different regression models ere chosen to cover models with different complexities, such s, linear models (Ridge regression), non-linear models (Support ector Ridge regression), models with inherent feature selection Ridge Lasso), ensemble methods (Random Forest). Our evaluation f these models was conducted for different parametric settings of he model. The best performing approach emerged to be the Ridge egression model in almost all cases of RCI feature and target vari- bles. .1. Supervised regression models In this section, we provide the details of the top three perform- ng regression models, namely, Ridge Regression, Lasso and Ran- om Forest. Ridge Regression is one of the most popular regression meth- ds. It is a linear regression method to model the relationship be- ween a scalar response, i.e. a target variable, and the given ex- lanatory variables. The goal of the model is to minimize the dif- erence between the predicted values of the scalar variable and the iven ground truth value. A simple linear regression method has tendency to over-fit the data by making the weights of the ex- lanatory variables arbitrarily large, resulting in their poor gener- lized performance, i.e. poor performance on the test data. In or- er to avoid this behavior, regularization techniques are applied o reduce over-fitting of the model to the training data. One of he most popular regularization methods is to add a penalty term ased on the  2 norm of the weight vector. One can control the mount of penalty through a hyperparameter. Mathematically, let = { x 1 , x 2 , . . . , x n } denote the training data of size n , where each i is a d -dimensional vector containing values of d predictors. In ur setting, the d -predictors correspond to the 21 RCI features. Let = { y 1 , y 2 , . . . , y n } be the corresponding target values, where y i is 5 In 2016 Fed Report, The adverse scenario is characterized by weakening eco- omic activity across all countries or country blocs included in the scenario. The conomic downturn is accompanied by a period of deflation in the United States nd in the other countries and country blocs. The adverse scenario features a mod- rate U.S. recession that begins in the first quarter of 2016. Real GDP in the United tates falls 1.75 percent from the pre-recession peak in the fourth quarter of 2015 o the recession trough in the first quarter of 2017, while the unemployment rate ises steadily, peaking at 7.50 percent in the middle of 2017. The U.S. recession is ccompanied by a mild deflationary period with consumer prices falling about 0.50 ercent over the four quarters of 2016. Reflecting weak economic conditions and eflationary pressures, short-term interest rates in the United States remain near ero over the projection period. The 10-year Treasury yield declines to 1.25 percent n early 2016 before rising gradually thereafter to 3 percent in the first quarter of 019. 6 In 2016 Report, The severely adverse scenario is characterized by a severe lobal recession accompanied by a period of heightened corporate financial stress nd negative yields for short-term U.S. Treasury securities. In this scenario, the level f U.S. real GDP begins to decline in the first quarter of 2016 and reaches a trough n the first quarter of 2017 that is 6.25 percent below the pre-recession peak. The nemployment rate increases by 5 percentage points, to 10 percent, by the middle f 2017, and headline consumer price inflation rises from about 0.25 percent at an nnual rate in the first quarter of 2016 to about 1.25 percent at an annual rate by he end of the recession. t o q f o O s a W m e e a t a p g b t c o ne of the 4 target values for each x i . The objective function of the idge regression is as follows: in w  Y  X w  2 2 +  w  2 2 , (1) here, w is the weight vector that will be learned during the train- ng phase.  controls the penalty associated with the  2 regulariza- ion. Lasso builds on the linear regression model, except that instead f the  2 regularization, it uses  1 regularization. The  1 regulariza- ion has the inherent capability of selecting features by forcing fea- ure weights to be zero which otherwise will have a close-to-zero alue. Mathematically the Lasso minimizes the following objective unction: in w  Y  X w  2 2 +  w  1 , (2) here similar to the ridge regression,  controls the amount of egularization. In our study, we experiment with several values of and choose the one that performs the best. In both Lasso and Ridge regression, one can use the weights f the explanatory variables, i.e. w, to determine the importance f the corresponding features. Since the weights are implicitly af- ected by the scale of the variables, all variables are normalized to emove the scaling. We use the standard normalization such that ll variables have zero mean and unit variance. Furthermore, We se the absolute value of the weights associated with each feature o determine its relative importance. Unlike Ridge regression and Lasso, which are a single model, andom Forest is an ensemble method. In ensemble learning, the entral theme is to combine multiple simple models to build a ingle powerful model. In this spirit, a random forest regression odel is a collection of decision tree regressors, where each deci- ion tree regressor is built on a sample of data, chosen at random but with replacement) from the original data. The decision trees, which are the building block of a random orest model, are built by splitting the training dataset into subsets ased on some criteria for the quality of split. There are many met- ics available to measure the quality of a split. A standard metric sed for random forest is the Mean Squared Error (MSE) measure. SE measures the variance reduction in the data due to splitting, nd is defined as: SE = 1 n n  i =1 (y i   y i ) 2 . (3) herefore, intuitively, it measures the goodness of fit for each fea- ure. In order to build a decision tree, at each node, the quality f split is computed for each feature. The feature with the best uality of split is chosen for defining the split, and is removed rom consideration for subsequent splits in the tree. This process f splitting is recursively repeated until a stopping criterion is met. ne frequently used stopping criterion is the minimum number of amples in the leaf nodes. We also use MSE measure as our evalu- tion metric to compute the quality of the final regression model. hile MSE provides a measure of goodness of fit for the overall odel, it does not provide guidance on feature importance. How- ver, since a random forest is a collection of regression trees op- rating on features one-by-one, feature importance is obtained as by-product of the model building process. Individual regression rees intrinsically perform feature selection by selecting appropri- te split points. This information can be used to measure the im- ortance of each feature. The features that are selected first bear reater importance than those that are selected later in the model uilding process. Since a random forest is a collection of decision rees, this notion of feature importance can be extended to the de- ision tree ensemble by simply averaging the feature importance f each tree. 776 A. Agarwal, A. Gupta and A. Kumar et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 277 (2019) 770783 Table 5 Results of different regression models with different parameters setting across 4 target variables. For each target variable, only top performing models are reported. Target variable Regression model Parameter Param value MSE Tier 1 capital ratio Ending Adverse Ridge  100 2.95 Lasso  0.5 2.97 Lasso  1 3 Lasso  10 3 Lasso  100 3 Tier 1 capital ratio Ending Severely Adverse Ridge  100 3.91 Lasso  0.5 4.11 Random Forest T 10 0 0 4.21 Random Forest T 100 4.26 Lasso  10 4.29 Tier 1 leverage ratio Ending Adverse Ridge  10 1.72 Lasso  0.1 1.85 Ridge  1 1.86 Ridge  100 1.91 Random Forest T 10 0 0 1.91 Tier 1 leverage ratio Ending Severely Adverse Random Forest T 10 0 0 1.3 Ridge  100 1.31 Lasso  0.1 1.32 Random Forest T 50 1.32 w s s m  i e s f v R 4 3 f b s p s b p a s b y t s f a d i t l t d w m a a d For real valued target variables, y i , the random forest algorithm consists of two main steps as follows. 1. For t = 1 , . . . , T , create a dataset X t by sampling with replace- ment from original dataset X . Here T is a hyper-parameter de- noting the number of estimators we want the random forest model to have, which determines the number of regression trees in the ensemble. 2. Build a regression tree, f t , on X t ,  t . This generates a collection of regression trees, f 1 , . . . , f T . Once regression models (Ridge, Lasso or Random Forest) are built corresponding to the 4 target variables using the training data, the models must be evaluated on the test data. Given the test data D t = { (x 1 , y 1 ) , (x 2 , y 2 ) , . . . (x m , y m ) } , where m is number of data points in the test set, the MSE of D t is computed using Eq (3) . For the test data point,  x , the prediction value is computed us- ing the corresponding function. For the Ridge regression and the Lasso, it is computed as follows:  y i = f (  x i ) = w T  x i , (4) whereas for the random forest model, it is computed by taking an average of all predictions, i.e.,  y i = f (  x i ) = 1 T T  t=1 f t (  x i ) . (5) As discussed earlier, in our dataset we have 4 target variables that result in 4 different regression models. Each of these models gives us a ranked list of features ordered according to their impor- tance. In order to get a unique ranked list of features, these ranked list can be aggregated using the importance scores, i.e., absolute weight for Ridge and Lasso and the value of the split in Random Forest. The scores are normalized before aggregation to avoid the bias due to scaling. 3.1.1. Specific considerations for regression modeling The experimental setting used in this paper is built on train- ing data set constructed from news articles obtained from Thom- son Reuters and Feds stress test results. For Thomson Reuters, although we have multiple years of data available, ground truth stress test target variables are available only for 4 years, starting from year 2013 to 2016. In the year 2013, stress test results were available for only 18 banks, and only for the severely adverse sce- nario. In other years, the stress test results are available for 2030 banks, and for both adverse and severely adverse scenarios. There- fore, we only considered 3 years of news articles based feature variables data, from 20132015. This is because we match year t features data with t + 1 stress test results, as the stress tests in year t + 1 are applied to Q4 condition of the bank in year t . There- fore, the matched year of articles to the stress test results is the one prior to the year of stress test results. This gives us a a total number of 69 bank-years however from these bank-years we fil- tered all the bank-years that had less than 200 articles across all features. This resulted in 45 bank-years which are used for both training and test data set creation. In our experimental setting, we normalize the data across both rows (i.e. features) and columns (across banks). For various rea- sons, including bank size and popularity, a bank can be mentioned in a large number of articles in the media. Therefore, it is impor- tant that we normalize the data. This is done by normalizing each bank across all its features. Similarly, we normalize the data for each feature across banks. We use standard normalization to have zero mean and unit variance after normalization. To overcome the challenge of small data set available for learn- ing, we used cross validation for the evaluation of regression mod- els with 20 folds. We run each model for different parameter set- tings and report the best results, averaged over all folds. In Table 5 , e show the results of different models with different parameter ettings. We experiment with 3 kind of models i.e., Ridge Regres- ion, Lasso and Random Forest. For Ridge and Lasso, we experi- ent with different values of the regularization parameter, i.e. ,  {0.01, 0.1, 0.5, 1, 10, 100}, and for the Random Forest, we exper- ment with different numbers of trees (i.e. estimators) in the For- st, i.e. T  {10, 50, 100, 10 0 0}. All implementations are done using cikit-learn in Python. All the parameter values are set at their de- ault values except for the ones mentioned above. In the unsuper- ised learning analysis discussed next, we use the results from the idge regression model due to its consistent performance across all target variable scenarios. .2. Risk culture analysis through clustering The ridge regression model provides, most importantly, the RCI eatures that emerge as significant and important in assessing the anks quality of stress test results. A banks ability to pass the tress tests in flying colors, in both adverse scenarios and by both erformance metrics, is a strong indication that the bank possesses trong risk culture. However, it is not a perfect indicator of the anks risk culture. Therefore, guided by the significant and im- ortant features obtained in the supervised learning, we explore n unsupervised differentiation between the banks in terms of the elected important feature variables. These differentiated classes of anks may indicate a risk culture score for banks above and be- ond the stress test results. Ridge regression model provided a ranking for feature impor- ance. We use the aggregated ranked list based on the important core of individual target variables, and use the most important eatures from that analysis to conduct an unsupervised clustering nalysis for further insight on banks risk culture. Among the many ifferent clustering methods available, we use the k-means cluster- ng approach. The k-means clustering method is arguably one of he most popular and widely used methods for clustering. Much ike any other clustering method, it is an unsupervised method o partition the data in a predefined number of k clusters. The -dimensional vector of observed data is divided into k clusters ith each data point belonging to the cluster with the nearest ean. The means serve as a cluster representative and sometimes re also referred to as data representatives. Mathematically, if we re given n data points x 1 , x 2 , . . . , x n , where each x i  R d is a d - imensional vector, k-means clustering attempts to find k clusters A. Agarwal, A. Gupta and A. Kumar et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 277 (2019) 770783 777 C a w m u n t n w d b ( m a t t t t o a i c a i o c y s 2 p r s s a a 2 b p b o o o i l u c 4 M i t r f d r w m l t l p e R a p c i p n e e m a t l l m a i f f M o c m b r m L i ( w d d 1 T C l s s t d t R f d d t A r s t m s t s s s s 1 , C 2 , . . . , C k by solving the following optimization problem: rg min C 1 ,C 2 , ... ,C k k  i =1  x  C i || x  i || 2 , (6) here i is the mean of cluster C i . The objective function of k- eans clustering is non-convex, implying that it may not have a nique minimum (solution). The solution is obtained often by run- ing the algorithm multiple times with different initializations, and he best solution from these multiple runs is chosen to be the fi- al solution. The k-means clustering algorithm is quite simple and orks by the following steps: (1) initialize k cluster centers ran- omly; (2) assign each data point to one of the nearest clusters ased on the distance between the data point and cluster mean; 3) re-calculate the cluster center for each cluster, by taking the ean of all the points belonging to that cluster. Steps (2) and (3) re repeated until convergence is achieved. In our implementation of clustering, we used 13 most impor- ant features from supervised learning to construct the data vec- ors for unsupervised learning and to generate the clusters. Note hat the data are normalized across both rows and columns, as in he supervised learning models. In k-means clustering, the number f clusters k is an input parameter to the algorithm, and it is usu- lly difficult to determine the best value of k in advance. Therefore, n our experiments, we tried different values of k . As such, an in- reasing value of k would result in more cohesive clusters, however fter a point there is diminishing value in increasing k for obtain- ng meaningful clusters. Based on our analysis of different choices f k , we selected k = 3 as a trade-off between degree of cluster ohesion and a meaningful labeling of clusters. In order to obtain further insight into the clusters, further anal- sis is done through visualization. An original 13 dimensional data pace is harder to visualize, as it cannot be adequately displayed in or 3 dimensional space. For this purpose, we use principal com- onent analysis (PCA), one of widely used methods for dimension eduction, for reducing the dimension of the data for ease of vi- ualization. PCA works by projecting the data into a lower dimen- ional space such that the variance of the original data is preserved s much as possible. In our experiments, we were able to preserve pproximately 60% variance of the original 13-dimensional data. We generated clusters for all three years, i.e. 2013, 2014 and 015 independently, as well as all the three bank-years data com- ined together for each bank. This allows us to examine both tem- oral risk culture groups, as well as average risk culture group each ank belongs to for our study period. Since clustering methods nly provide a partitioning of the data, while the actual identity f those partitions must be assigned by a subject matter expert. In rder to aid the analysis and be consistent among different cluster- ngs, we similarly label different partitions across the years to al- ow comparison between the clusters. The implementation is done sing the scikit-learn package available in python for both k-means lustering and PCA-based dimension reduction. . Results and discussion We follow the risk culture indicators (RCIs) utilized by Fritz- orgenthal et al. (2016) to define the features for supervised learn- ng of risk culture. The seven risk culture indicators are: regula- ory requirements, governance, portfolio, employees, risk strategy, eputation and work culture. A brief overview of the risk culture ramework based on these indicators was provided in Section 2 . A ictionary of words is created for each risk culture indicator, where egulatory words are designed to capture regulatory requirements ith regard to risk management. Governance words identify senior anagements role in business and supervisory authority. Portfo- io refers to selected balance sheet related figures seen relevant o the quality of a banks risk culture. Employees features high- ight the training preparedness of the banks employees and em- loyee retention, while strategy is specific to appropriate risk gov- rnance and processes in place for different risks of a specific bank. eputation identifies indications for banks reputation, litigations nd their transparent disclosure. Finally, work culture identifies the rinciples and behavior of an organization and its employees. In order to identify the sentiments corresponding to each risk ulture indicator, a natural language processing based sentiment dentifier, Alchemy, is found to have better performance com- ared to LoughranMcDonald positive-negative sentiment dictio- aries Loughran and McDonald (2011b) . Therefore, we perform our xperiments using the Alchemy sentiment assignment method. As xplained in Section 3 , this sentiment analysis gives us a 21 di- ensional feature vector for each bank-year. Summary statistics for ll the bank-years of data for each feature is shown in Table 6 . As seen in the table, portfolio and work culture are the only wo feature categories that are not covered in the corpus for at east one bank-year. All the other risk culture indicators have at east some discussion in the corpus for all banks, as seen by the inima in summary statistics. Regulatory requirement, reputation nd portfolio make the categories that get the maximum coverage n the news articles. Given the frequency of occurrence of these eatures is rather skewed towards the few largest banks, medians or the feature occurrence are more instructive than the means. edian for the work culture features are the smallest, with all the ther features showing good levels of occurrence in the corpus. As such, all the 21 features can contribute and indicate the risk ulture of a bank, however it is arguable that some features are ore instructive than others for assessing the risk culture of a ank. We use the banks annual stress test results to guide feature eduction for risk culture identification. Table 7 shows the sum- ary statistics for four key ratios, Tier 1 Capital Ratio and Tier 1 everage Ratio, under the adverse and the severely adverse scenar- os for the sample of banks. Tier 1 capital ratio is Tier 1 capital shareholders equity and retained earnings) divided by total risk- eighted assets of the bank. Tier 1 leverage ratio is Tier 1 capital ivided by a banks total exposures including consolidated assets, erivative exposure and certain off-balance sheet exposures. Tier Leverage Ratio is uniformly lower in all summary statistics than ier 1 Capital Ratio, with notably the standard deviation of Tier 1 apital Ratio also being higher. All severely adverse statistics are ower than the corresponding adverse scenario ones, except the tandard deviation of Tier 1 capital ratio under severely adverse cenario is higher than the standard deviation of Tier 1 capital ra- io in the adverse scenario. We use these ratios for each bank un- er adverse and severely adverse scenarios of Feds stress tests as he target variables for supervised learning using Ridge, Lasso and andom Forest regression models. The assumption is how banks air in these adverse scenarios in terms of these key ratios is in- icative of their risk culture. As the best representation of the target variables and the pre- ictor features for risk culture is not known a priori , we examine he representation using different regression model approaches. mong the different approaches and their corresponding paramet- ic choices considered and discussed in Section 3 , the Ridge regres- ion approach emerged as the best representation. Table 8 shows he target variables, the sentiment analysis method used in each odel, the corresponding mean squared error (MSE) and the most ignificant 4 variables of the model. The model fits are in general better for the Tier 1 Leverage Ra- io target variable case. The model fit is marginally worse in the everely adverse scenario for Tier 1 Capital Ratio, but better for everely adverse Tier 1 Leverage Ratio. Examining the four most ignificant variables in each of these models, the portfolio feature tands out as the most common important variable. Reputation 778 A. Agarwal, A. Gupta and A. Kumar et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 277 (2019) 770783 Table 6 Summary Statistics for the Features defined using the Alchemy sentiment attribution tool. Banks with less than 200 articles across all features were removed for the above statistics, and these trimmed data were used in the supervised and unsuper- vised learning. Table 7 Summary statistics for the target variables. Table 8 Summary of models to identify significant risk culture features. A. Agarwal, A. Gupta and A. Kumar et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 277 (2019) 770783 779 Table 9 Ordered list of most significant risk culture features. a a s e a n d f g R a u n i i e 1 w t s c t t c s p h t m o o o t v fi i t t i b a y t a 1 b F 1 m p b e  n f t o s l t t b p f c n t o a h ( f h e ( n c f 2 f s t d t a p t f nd work culture are picked up as the second level of significance cross these models. Finally, regulatory requirement, governance, trategy and employee feature as important in some of the mod- ls. In order to advance the analysis for differences in risk culture mong banks based on the significant risk culture indicators, we eed to more formally identify the most significant indicators. As escribed in Section 3.1.1 , in order to get a unique ranked list of eatures, the ranking for the model for each target variable is ag- regated using the importance scores, i.e., absolute weight for the idge regression. The scores are normalized before aggregation to void bias due to scaling. Among the four Ridge regression models sing the four target variables, we identify the common most sig- ificant variables ordered from most to least significant in Table 9 . All three sentiment flavors of portfolio and reputation appear n the top 13 significant variables in Table 9 . Negative and pos- tive sentiments for employee are highlighted as important. Strat- gy and governance with positive sentiment appear among the top 3 features, while work culture and regulatory requirement appear ith a neutral reference. The governance category first appears in he 13 th spot. Therefore, top 13 features are considered in the un- upervised learning analysis as this would include at least one risk ulture indicator of each type and sentiment. Looking beyond the op 13 variables, the same categories continue to be important in he next few slots. It is interesting to note that, even though work ulture occurrences are fewer in the corpus, it appears in the fifth pot in the ranked variable list. Using the most significant risk culture indicators, we next im- lement an unsupervised learning clustering analysis to identify ow these indicators help distinguish banks from one another in heir risk culture characteristics. As discussed in Section 3.2 , a k- eans clustering methodology is utilized in our study. Based on ur analysis of different choices of k , we selected k = 3 as a trade- ff between degree of cluster cohesion and a meaningful labeling f clusters. We group banks in the study duration into 3 groups by he 13 most important RCI feature variables found from the super- ised learning Ridge regression models. We conduct this analysis rst at the bank level, assuming that banks risk culture character- stics do not change through the years. For this purpose we merge he bank-year data through the years for each bank for defining he 13 feature variables for each bank, and a k-means cluster- ng is performed for the banks. Subsequently, we conduct year- y-year clustering using bank-year data for the 13 feature vari- bles to examine how banks risk culture characteristics changed ear-on-year. Fig. 2 displays the 3 clusters formed of the banks included in his study. The banks form distinct groups, each group with a size- ble membership: Group 0 (blue nodes) consists of 7 banks, Group (green nodes) has 13 members, and Group 2 (red nodes) has 4 anks. The largest bank members of Group 0 are: Citigroup, Wells argo, Bank of America, while the largest bank members of Group are JPMorgan and Goldman Sachs, and finally, the largest bank ember of Group 2 is State Street. In order to understand the roperty of each group, we need to review the features of the anks in each cluster. We plot the mean and standard deviation for ach feature in a bar chart of Fig. 3 for the banks in each cluster blue (Group 0), green (Group 1) and red (Group 2), after feature ormalization. The bar chart is organized by features, with levels or each feature for the three clusters grouped together to facili- ate a comparison between clusters for each feature. Comparison f normalized feature levels between different clusters is quite in- tructive. The bar heights for each feature corresponds to the mean evel of the feature for the three clusters, with the most impor- ant feature chosen from supervised learning organized from left o right and the length of the line overlaid on each colored feature ar is the standard deviation of that feature for each cluster. Focusing on the positive sentiment features for reputation, em- loyee, strategy, portfolio and governance, and negative sentiment or portfolio and reputation, Group 0 (blue nodes) does very poorly ompared to Groups 1 and 2. Group 0 (blue nodes) are strongly egative for positive sentiment and strongly positive on the nega- ive sentiment. It is, therefore, safe to label Group 0 (blue nodes) as ne with weakest risk culture. Comparing Group 1 (green nodes) nd Group 2 (red nodes), we observe that Group 2 (red nodes) as a high level of reputation positive feature, while Group 1 green nodes) has a high level of employee negative feature. Port- olio positive feature is negative for Group 1 (green nodes), and igh and positive for Group 2 (red nodes). Based on these differ- nces in terms of the most significant features, we label Group 2 red nodes) to have the strongest risk culture and Group 1 (green odes) to have a moderate risk culture. We need to shift our attention to examine how risk culture has hanged through the years of Feds stress testing program. In Fig. 4 , rom top to bottom yearly clusters of banks for 2013, 2014 and 015 are provided. In the right panel of the figure, corresponding eature summaries are provided in a similar normalized format as een before for all years combined. Cluster labels are given so that he cluster properties by the feature space is not too dramatically ifferent. An examination across the three years features charac- eristics still suggests that Group 2 (red nodes) is the most favor- ble group for its risk culture characteristics. Group 0 (blue nodes) ositions least favorably and Group 1 (green nodes) falls in the in- ermediate range. From year to year, the profile of the un-normalized bar charts or each groups risk culture indicators shows some similarities. 780 A. Agarwal, A. Gupta and A. Kumar et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 277 (2019) 770783 Fig. 2. Clustering of banks into 3 Clusters. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) Fig. 3. Properties of each cluster of banks in the 3 Clusters. Here group 0 corre- sponds to blue nodes in Fig. 2 , 1 to green, and 2 to red. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) Table 10 Number of banks in each group in each year. Year Group 0 Group 1 Group 2 Total 2013 14 4 3 21 2014 4 5 14 23 2015 6 11 6 23 i r l e t w i t t t s o G t t t p 1 s 0 i d T However, in normalized plots shown in Fig. 4 , the profiles differ from each other by year and by quality of risk culture. Yearly label- ing by the relative properties is still possible for weakest, moderate and strongest risk culture indication. Throughout, Group 0 is la- beled as the group with weakest risk culture, Group 1 with moder- ate and Group 2 with the best profile of risk culture characteristics. Group 0 consistently shows weak trends by reputation, employee or portfolio characteristics. In the same token, Group 2 is con- sistently strong in employee positive sentiment among other re- deeming characteristics. One must note that the number of banks n each years stress testing program has changed, with the most ecent set of banks undergoing the Feds stress tests being the argest. Table 10 displays the membership size of each group in ach year. Group 0 (blue nodes, weakest risk culture) was initially he largest group, while Group 2 (red nodes, strongest risk culture) as the smallest group with Goldman Sachs being a member. The ncreasing total number of banks going through the Feds stress ests, as well as the changing size of the clusters each year suggests hat some banks have migrated from a cluster to another over the hree years. If this migration is for the better, this suggests that the tress test program was instrumental in improving the risk culture f these banks. And an improvement would be if a bank goes from roup 0 to Group 1 or Group 2, or from Group 1 to Group 2. Tables 11 and 12 show the number and names of the banks hat transition from a group to another. Along the diagonal of these ransitions matrices are the banks that remained in their group in he two consecutive years. From year 2013 to 2014, there were 14 ositive transitions, 2 banks moved from Group 0 to Group 1 and 1 from Group 0 to Group 2. On the other hand, there were also everal negative transitions, namely from Group 1 over to Group and from Group 2 to Group 1. There was 1 bank that retained ts Group 1 (green node) status. There were significant, but less ramatic, transitions from 2014 to 2015, as seen in the diagonal of able 12 . There was 1 dramatic drop from Group 2 to Group 0 and A. Agarwal, A. Gupta and A. Kumar et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 277 (2019) 770783 781 Fig. 4. Yearly clustering of banks into 3 Clusters along with each clusters feature mean and standard deviation. Years 2013, 2014 and 2015. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) Table 11 Number and names of banks making cluster transitions from year 2013 to year 2014. 2014 Group 0 2014 Group 1 2014 Group 2 2013 Group 0 0 3 (pnc,bbt,wells) 11 (jpm,usb,sun,cap,bmo, ftb,s&h,m&t,zions,nt,ally) 2013 Group 1 3 (boa,bny,citi) 1 (hsbc) 0 2013 Group 2 1 (s&s) 1 (m&s) 1 (gs) Table 12 Number and names of banks making cluster transitions from year 2014 to year 2015. 2015 Group 0 2015 Group 1 2015 Group 2 2014 Group 0 2 (boa,citi) 0 2 (bny,s&s) 2014 Group 1 3 (pnc,bbt,hsbc) 0 2 (m&s,wells) 2014 Group 2 1 (cap) 11 (jpm,s&h,cfg,bmo,rfc, 2 (nt,usb) ftb, m&t, zions, sun, gs, ally) 2 N t a a b r b c a i positive transitions from Group 0 to Group 2 made by Bank of ew York Mellon and State Street. Similar analysis can also be done for risk culture transitions in he future years as the Federal Reserves stress tests results become vailable. As new banks are added to the stress testing program, nd as text sources become available for these banks, features can e extracted as needed for the definition of the clusters, and the isk culture of the bank can be identified based on the cluster the ank is found to belong in. If arbitrary large banks need to be lassified for their risk culture based on textual news data, a re- ssessment of the unsupervised learning model may be needed for ts continued suitability. An updated unsupervised clustering can 782 A. Agarwal, A. Gupta and A. Kumar et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 277 (2019) 770783 Table A.1 Banks included in this study along with the symbol associ- ated with them and used in the clustering results. Banks J.P.Morgan Chase & Co (jpm) Bank of America (boa) Wells Fargo (wells) Citigroup (citi) Goldman Sachs Group (gs) Morgan Stanley (m&s) U.S. Bancorp (usb) Bank of New York Mellon (bny) PNC Financial Services (pnc) Capital One (cap) HSBC North America Holdings (hsbc) TD Group US Holding (tdg) State Street Corporation (s&s) BB&T Corporation (bbt) SunTrust Banks (sun) Ally Financial (ally) Fifth Third Bank (ftb) Citizens Financial Group (cfg) Santander Holdings USA (s&h) BMO Financial Corp (bmo) Regions Financial Corporation (rfc) M&T Bank Corporation (m&t) Zions Bancorporation (zion) Northern Trust Corporation (nt) Table A.2 Sample of keywords representing each Risk Culture Indicator (RCI). Category Keywords Regulatory requirements Risk management, risk-taking behavior, ethics, compliance, Regulatory failings, regulatory demand, disclosure report, controls, risk delegation, risk education, testing, limit, proactive, report. Governance Asset, experience, governance, leadership, operational excellence, competent leader, professional, authority, monitor. Portfolio Debt, over dues, default, impairment level, off-balance positions, derivatives, below target performance, loss, non-performing asset, leverage, write-offs. Employees Layoff, job cut, job elimination, workforce reduction, attrition, hiring, recruitment, skilled, competent, review, performance. Risk strategy Takeover, buyout, acquisition, merger, risk portfolio, subsidiary, subsidiaries, new venture,dividend payout, risk strategy, holding, risk framework, risk appetite, risk perspective, priority, resources. Reputation Lawsuit, litigation, sue, compliance fail, compliance risk, legal issue, penalty, complaints, integrity, honest, competence, confidence. Work culture Process breach, procedure breach, reluctance, internal competition, centralized decision, decentralized decision, high pressure, vulnerable environment, work around, avoidance, delegation, integrity. R A then be used to identify the new banks risk culture. Moreover, one may argue that the analysis done here on the basis of news ar- ticles on the banks undergoing stress tests can be complemented by other documents on these banks, such as the banks SEC filings of annual reports, etc. This would be a worthy analysis to extend the work done here. Our objective here was to evaluate how well an external reporting resource was able to evaluate banks condi- tions year-on-year as they underwent the Federal Reserve stress tests. 5. Concluding remarks We explore the hypothesis in this paper that news articles that cover banks on a range of topics can lead us to evaluate the banks risk culture. Following risk culture indicators from the literature, we define features based on a large corpus of new articles to support the risk culture learning. Using two alter- nate sentiment identification approaches, the features are defined and evaluated. Thereafter, a supervised learning method based on Ridge regression models is used. Target variables from Feds stress tests are used to identify the most significant variables that contribute the greatest towards prediction in the Ridge re- gression learning. A clustering based unsupervised learning based on the most important variables identified in the supervised learning shows how banks can be grouped by their risk culture characteristics. Stress test scores used as target variables in supervised learn- ing help identify the most important features for risk culture. Even though stress testing is a regulatory initiative, the most im- portant variables are found to be those that indicate a banks portfolio, reputation, employee characteristics and strategy. Regu- latory requirement feature shows up as eleventh important vari- able. Moreover, one may think that employee training and reten- tion are important for risk culture identification, and in fact, both negative and positive sentiment for it show up among the top 6 risk culture features. Work culture emerges as important at the 5 th place, despite having fewer data points for it in the news articles corpus. The unsupervised learning based on the most important 13 features identified in supervised learning allows clustering of the banks in distinct groups. An examination of the feature levels of each group arguably allows assigning high, medium, and low qual- ity of risk culture to the three groups. We similarly implement clustering on the bank-year features data to examine how, if at all, the banks risk culture characteristics change with time. While some banks stick to their original group membership, we observe migrations that suggest improvement and deterioration in risk cul- ture characteristics. We labeled all 24 banks for their risk culture characteristics through the 20132015 period. Freezing the clusters from 2015 or considering the clusters cre- ated for all the years data combined, future transitions of banks risk culture can be examined as more Feds stress test results and corresponding years news articles corpus becomes available. Simi- larly, as new banks get included in the Feds stress test program, the banks risk culture can be examined by determining which group it belongs to based on the features defined for it using the news articles data. A reassessment and updating of the unsuper- vised learning model may be needed for its continued suitability, if the bank set or the textual data source is expanded significantly beyond what is considered in this article. Appendix A Tables A .1A .2 eferences lfano, S. J., Feuerriegel, S., & Neumann, D. (2015). Do pessimists move asset prices? evidence from applying prospect theory to news sentiment . Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2602353 . Antweiler, W. , & Frank, M. Z. (2004). Is all that talk just noise? The information con- tent of internet stock message boards. The Journal of Finance, 59 (3), 12591294 . Ashby, S. (2014). Guidance on supervisory interaction with financial institutions on risk culture feedback on the FSBs consultative document Ph.D. thesis. London School of Economics . Bae, S. C. , Chang, K. , & Kang, E. (2012). Culture, corporate governance, and dividend policy: international evidence. Journal of Financial Research, 35 (2), 289316 . Balakrishnan, R. , Qiu, X. Y. , & Srinivasan, P. (2010). On the predictive ability of nar- rative disclosures in annual reports. European Journal of Operational Research, 202 (3), 789801 . Bodnaruk, A. , Loughran, T. , & McDonald, B. (2015). Using 10-k text to gauge financial constraints. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 50 (04), 623646 . Bowman, E. H. (1984). Content analysis of annual reports for corporate strategy and risk. Interfaces, 14 (1), 6171 . https://ssrn.com/abstract=2602353 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0002 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0002 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0002 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0002 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0003 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0003 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0004 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0004 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0004 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0004 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0004 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0005 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0005 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0005 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0005 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0005 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0006 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0006 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0006 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0006 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0006 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0007 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0007 A. Agarwal, A. Gupta and A. Kumar et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 277 (2019) 770783 783 B B C C C D F F F G G G G I I K L L L L L L L M M M M N N N N P P R R R R R R S S S S T T T T V W Z ozeman, B. , & Kingsley, G. (1998). Risk culture in public and private organizations. Public Administration Review , 109118 . urns, T. E. , & Stalker, G. M. (1961). The management of innovation . University of Illi- nois at Urbana-Champaigns Academy for Entrepreneurial Leadership Historical Research Reference in Entrepreneurship. hatrath, A. , Miao, H. , Ramchander, S. , & Villupuram, S. (2014). Currency jumps, co- jumps and the role of macro news. Journal of International Money and Finance, 40 , 4262 . hernobai, A. , Jorion, P. , & Yu, F. (2012). The determinants of operational risk in us financial institutions. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 46 (06), 16831725 . hiang, C., Han, C.-C., Chiang, Y.-M., Tsai, T.-C., Wu, F.-S., Seng, D., et al. (2015). Mar- ket liquidity, funding liquidity in the news and housing price . Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2565340 . rennan, L. T. (2004). Ethics, governance and risk management: Lessons from mirror group newspapers and barings bank. Journal of Business Ethics, 52 (3), 257266 . euerriegel, S. , Wolff, G. , & Neumann, D. (2015). Information processing of foreign ex- change news: Extending the overshooting model to include qualitative information from news sentiment . SSRN, 2603435. ritz-Morgenthal, S. , Hellmuth, J. , & Packham, N. (2016). Does risk culture matter? The relationship between risk culture indicators and stress test results. Journal of Risk Management in Financial Institutions, 9 (1), 7184 . SB (2014). Guidance on supervisory interaction with financial institutions on risk culture: A framework for assessing risk culture. Technical Report . Financial Sta- bility Board . allemore, J. (2013). Does bank opacity enable regulatory forbearance. Technical Re- port . Chicago Booth . eretto, E. F. , & Pauluzzo, R. (2015). Knowledge management and risk culture in the banking industry: relations and problems. In Proceedings of the European con- ference on knowledge management (p. 313). Academic Conferences International Limited . herardi, S. , & Nicolini, D. (20 0 0). To transfer is to transform: The circulation of safety knowledge. Organization, 7 (2), 329348 . lazer, E. , & Rexrode, C. (2016). As regulators focus on culture, wall street struggles to define it. The Wall Street Journal . IF (2009). Reform in the financial services industry: Strengthening practices for a more stable system . Institute of International Finance Report. turriaga, F. J. L. , & Sanz, I. P. (2015). Bankruptcy visualization and prediction using neural networks: A study of us commercial banks. Expert Systems with Applica- tions, 42 (6), 28572869 . imbrough, R. L. , & Componation, P. J. (2009). The relationship between organiza- tional culture and enterprise risk management. Engineering Management Journal, 21 (2), 1826 . aw, J. , & Singleton, V. (2005). Object lessons. Organization, 12 (3), 331355 . i, F. (2010). The information content of forward-looking statements in corporate fil- ings a Nave Bayesian machine learning approach. Journal of Accounting Research, 48 (5), 10491102 . ischinsky, A. (2011). In times of crisis: A corpus approach to the construction of the global financial crisis in annual reports. Critical Discourse Studies, 8 (3), 153168 . iu, B. (2012). Sentiment analysis and opinion mining. Synthesis lectures on human language technologies, 5 (1), 1167 . oughran, T. , & McDonald, B. (2011a). When is a liability not a liability? Textual analysis, dictionaries, and 10-ks. The Journal of Finance, 66 (1), 3565 . oughran, T. , & McDonald, B. (2011b). When is a liability not a liability? Textual analysis, dictionaries, and 10-ks. The Journal of Finance, 66 (1), 3565 . oughran, T. , & McDonald, B. (2014). Regulation and financial disclosure: The impact of plain english. Journal of Regulatory Economics, 45 (1), 94113 . ntyl, M. V. , Graziotin, D. , & Kuutila, M. (2018). The evolution of sentiment analy- sis - A review of research topics, venues, and top cited papers. Computer Science Review, 27 , 1632 . cConnell, P. J. (2013). A risk culture framework for systemically important banks. Journal of Risk and Governance, 3 (1), 2368 . engelkamp, A. , Hobert, S. , & Schumann, M. (2015). Corporate credit risk analy- sis utilizing textual user generated content-a twitter based feasibility study. In PACIS (p. 236) . ihet, R. (2013). Effects of culture on firm risk-taking: A cross-country and cross-in- dustry analysis. Journal of Cultural Economics, 37 (1), 109151 . assirtoussi, A. K. , Aghabozorgi, S. , Wah, T. Y. , & Ngo, D. C. L. (2014). Text mining for market prediction: A systematic review. Expert Systems with Applications, 41 (16), 76537670 . assirtoussi, A. K. , Aghabozorgi, S. , Wah, T. Y. , & Ngo, D. C. L. (2015). Text mining of news-headlines for forex market prediction: A multi-layer dimension reduction algorithm with semantics and sentiment. Expert Systems with Applications, 42 (1), 306324 . guyen, T. H. , Shirai, K. , & Velcin, J. (2015). Sentiment analysis on social media for stock movement prediction. Expert Systems with Applications, 42 (24), 96039611 . yman, R. , Gregory, D. , Kapadia, S. , Ormerod, P. , Tuckett, D. , & Smith, R. (2015). News and narratives in financial systems: Exploiting big data for systemic risk assessment. Technical Report . BoE, mimeo . alermo, T., Power, M., Ashby, S., Jordan, S., Munro, I., & Maguire, S. (2015). Search- ing for risk culture: Sites and dynamics . Available at: http://www.hec.unil.ch/ documents/seminars/dcc/1804.pdf . ower, M., Ashby, S., & Palermo, T. (2013). Risk culture in financial organisations: A research report . Available at: http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/67978/1/Palermo _ Rsik% 20culture%20research%20report _ 2016.pdf . achlin, G. , Last, M. , Alberg, D. , & Kandel, A. (2007). Admiral: A data mining based financial trading system. In Proceedings of the IEEE symposium on computational intelligence and data mining, CIDM (pp. 720725). IEEE . anco, G. , Bordino, I. , Bormetti, G. , Caldarelli, G. , Lillo, F. , & Treccani, M. (2016). Cou- pling news sentiment with web browsing data improves prediction of intra-day price dynamics. PloS one, 11 (1), e0146576 . ekabsaz, N., Lupu, M., Baklanov, A ., Hanbury, A ., Dr, A ., & Anderson, L. (2017). Volatility prediction using financial disclosures sentiments with word embedding- based ir models arXiv preprint arXiv: 1702.01978 , Feb 7 . nnqvist, S. , & Sarlin, P. (2015a). Detect & describe: Deep learning of bank stress in the news. In Proceedings of the IEEE symposium series on computational intel- ligence (pp. 890897). IEEE . nnqvist, S. , & Sarlin, P. (2015b). Identifying bank stress by deep learning of news. In Proceedings of the workshop new challenges in neural computation (p. 112). Citeseer . nnqvist, S. , & Sarlin, P. (2017). Bank distress in the news: Describing events through deep learning. Neurocomputing, 264 , 5770 . chumaker, R. P. , Zhang, Y. , Huang, C.-N. , & Chen, H. (2012). Evaluating sentiment in financial news articles. Decision Support Systems, 53 (3), 458464 . errano, E. , & Iglesias, C. A. (2016). Validating viral marketing strategies in twitter via agent-based social simulation. Expert Systems with Applications, 50 , 140150 . heedy, E. , & Griffin, B. (2014). Empirical analysis of risk culture in financial institu- tions: Interim report. Technical Report . Macquarie University, Centre for Interna- tional Finance and Regulation . heedy, E. A. , Griffin, B. , & Barbour, J. P. (2015). A framework and measure for ex- amining risk climate in financial institutions. Journal of Business and Psychology, 32 (1), 101116 . ai, I. , Olson, B. , & Blessner, P. (2016). Unsupervised text mining approach to early warning system. World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology, Interna- tional Journal of Computer, Electrical, Automation, Control and Information Engi- neering, 10 (4), 651656 . sai, F.-T. , Lu, H.-M. , & Hung, M.-W. (2010). The effects of news sentiment and cov- erage on credit rating analysis.. In Proceedings of the PACIS (p. 199) . sai, M.-F. , & Wang, C.-J. (2017). On the risk prediction and analysis of soft in- formation in finance reports. European Journal of Operational Research, 257 (1), 243250 . sai, M.-F. , Wang, C.-J. , & Chien, P.-C. (2016). Discovering finance keywords via con- tinuous-space language models. ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems (TMIS), 7 (3), 7 . u, T.-T. , Chang, S. , Ha, Q. T. , & Collier, N. (2012). An experiment in integrating senti- ment features for tech stock prediction in twitter. In Proceedings of the workshop on information extraction and entity analytics on social media data (pp. 2338) . uthrich, B. , Cho, V. , Leung, S. , Permunetilleke, D. , Sankaran, K. , & Zhang, J. (1998). Daily stock market forecast from textual web data. In Proceedings of the IEEE in- ternational conference on systems, man, and cybernetics: 3 (pp. 27202725). IEEE . hang, Y. , Swanson, P. E. , & Prombutr, W. (2012). Measuring effects on stock returns of sentiment indexes created from stock message boards. Journal of Financial Research, 35 (1), 79114 . http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0008 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0008 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0008 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0008 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0009 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0009 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0009 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0009 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0009 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0010 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0010 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0010 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0010 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0010 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0010 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0011 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0011 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0011 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0011 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0011 https://ssrn.com/abstract=2565340 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0013 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0013 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0014 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0014 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0014 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0014 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0014 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0014 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0015 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0015 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0015 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0015 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0015 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0016 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0016 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0017 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0017 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0018 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0018 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0018 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0018 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0019 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0019 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0019 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0019 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0020 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0020 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0020 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0020 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0021 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0021 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0021 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0022 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0022 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0022 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0022 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0023 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0023 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0023 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0023 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0024 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0024 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0024 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0024 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0025 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0025 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0026 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0026 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0027 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0027 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0028 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0028 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0028 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0028 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0029 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0029 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0029 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0029 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0030 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0030 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0030 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0030 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0031 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0031 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0031 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0031 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0031 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0032 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0032 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0033 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0033 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0033 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0033 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0033 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0034 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0034 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0035 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0035 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0035 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0035 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0035 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0035 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0036 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0036 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0036 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0036 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0036 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0036 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0037 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0037 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0037 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0037 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0037 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0038 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0038 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0038 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0038 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0038 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0038 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0038 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0038 http://www.hec.unil.ch/documents/seminars/dcc/1804.pdf http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/67978/1/Palermo_Rsik%20culture%20research%20report_2016.pdf http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0041 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0041 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0041 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0041 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0041 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0041 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0042 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0042 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0042 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0042 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0042 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0042 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0042 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0042 http://arxiv.org/abs/1702.01978 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0044 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0044 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0044 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0044 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0045 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0045 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0045 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0045 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0046 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0046 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0046 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0046 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0047 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0047 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0047 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0047 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0047 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0047 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0048 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0048 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0048 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0048 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0049 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0049 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0049 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0049 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0050 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0050 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0050 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0050 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0050 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0051 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0051 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0051 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0051 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0051 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0052 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0052 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0052 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0052 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0052 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0053 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0053 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0053 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0053 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0054 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0054 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0054 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0054 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0054 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0055 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0055 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0055 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0055 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0055 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0055 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0056 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0056 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0056 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0056 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0056 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0056 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0056 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0056 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0057 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0057 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0057 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0057 http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0377-2217(19)30193-6/sbref0057 Learning risk culture of banks using news analytics 1 Introduction 2 Risk culture framework 2.1 Risk culture indicators & dictionary 2.2 Dataset and data sources 2.3 Sentiment analysis tools 3 Methodology for risk culture assessment 3.1 Supervised regression models 3.1.1 Specific considerations for regression modeling 3.2 Risk culture analysis through clustering 4 Results and discussion 5 Concluding remarks Appendix A References