OP-OEPJ180030 119..144 Job creation in a multi-sector labour market model for developing economies By Arnab K. Basua, Nancy H. Chaub, Gary S. Fieldsc, and Ravi Kanburd aDyson School of Applied Economics and Management, Cornell University, and IZA bDyson School of Applied Economics and Management, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA, and IZA; e-mail: hyc3@cornell.edu cDepartment of Economics, Cornell University, IZA, and WIDER dDyson School of Applied Economics and Management, Department of Economics, Cornell University, and IZA Abstract This paper proposes an overlapping generations multi-sector model of the labour market for developing countries with four heterogeneitiesheterogeneity within self-employment, heterogeneity in job experience, heterogeneity in pathways to self-employment, and heterogeneity in ability. We revisit an iconic paradox in a class of multi-sector labour market models in which the creation of high-wage employment exacerbates unemployment. Our richer setting allows for generational differences in the motivations for job search to be reflected in two distinct inverted- U-shaped relationships between unemployment and high-wage employment, one for youth and another for adults. In turn, the relationship between overall unemploy- ment and high-wage employment is shown to be non-monotonic and multi-peaked. The model also sheds light on the implications of increasing high-wage employment on self-employed workers. Non-monotonicity in unemployment notwithstanding, increasing high-wage employment leads to an unambiguous increase in high- paying self-employment, and an unambiguous decrease in free-entry (low-wage) self-employment. JEL classifications: I32, O17. 1. Introduction Does increasing high-wage employment increase or decrease unemployment? What does increasing high-wage employment do to youth and adult unemployment? What does increasing high-wage employment do to high-paying self-employed and low-wage free- entry work? These questions, and others like them, will be recognized as being important in the policy debates in developing countries. Can our models address them? VC Oxford University Press 2018. All rights reserved. Oxford Economic Papers, 71(1), 2019, 119144 doi: 10.1093/oep/gpy029 Advance Access Publication Date: 27 June 2018 D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 https://academic.oup.com/ The need for labour market models which stylize the reality of developing country con- ditions in tractable form in order to allow analysis of a range of policy questions has been central to the development economics field for decades. Among the most important contri- butions are the Lewis model (Lewis, 1954), which won its developer the Nobel Prize, and the HarrisTodaro model (Harris and Todaro, 1970), which was honoured as being one of the top 20 articles published in the American Economic Review in the last century. What both these models have at their core is multiple labour markets, each working in its own way and connected to the other. Both models also feature labour market segmentation, which we define consistent with the literature as arising when: (1) the same worker can earn more in some segments of the economy than he/she could earn in other segments; and (2) access to the better-paying segments is rationed, so that not all workers who would like to work in the good jobs part of the economy and who are capable of performing those jobs can in fact get such jobs. The iconic and counterintuitive answer of the HarrisTodaro model to the first question posed at the beginning of this introduction is of course that increasing high-wage employ- ment will increase unemployment. But it should be clear that neither the Lewis model nor the HarrisTodaro model can in fact address the remaining questions, because they do not incorporate features of developing countries which underpin those questions. We therefore need models which incorporate these realities in sufficiently tractable form that the full range of questions can be addressed. In the intervening decades since Lewis and Harris and Todaro did their work, it has be- come widely (though not universally) accepted that labour markets in developing econo- mies have multiple segments (as opposed to one single set of conditions applying to all) and that labour markets are segmented according to the preceding definition (i.e. (1) the same worker can earn more in some segments of the economy than in others; and (2) access to the better-paying segments is rationed) (Fields, 2014). Lewis (1954) had high-wage work and low-wage work coexisting, but unemployment was missing from his model. Harris and Todaro (1970) had three employment stateshigh-wage work and unemployment in urban areas, plus low-wage work in rural areas. Fields (1975, 1989) and others (e.g. Steel and Takagi, 1983) had both unemployment and low-wage work in urban areas in addition to high-wage urban employment. Banerjee and Newman (1993) had four occupational optionssubsistence work, work as a wage labourer, self-employment, and entrepreneur- shipbut no unemployment. Based on evidence accumulated to date, it has also become clear that a number of salient empirical features of developing country labour markets are at odds with the assumptions/ implications of these earlier models. In this paper, we build a multi-sector labour market model structured around four additional heterogeneities, which are warranted by empirical studies of developing countries. The four heterogeneities are: (1) duality of self-employ- ment; (2) two generations of workers with different job experience in overlapping gener- ations; (3) different pathways into the two types of self-employment; and (4) a range of abilities to enter upper-tier self-employment and achieve higher earnings from it. The first heterogeneity observed in the world and modelled here is duality within self- employment.1 Some people are self-employed because (1) they would like to work in the advantaged segments of the labour market, but access to those jobs is rationed; and (2) they 1 Heterogeneity of the informal sector, and the need for recognition by analysts and policymakers, has been stressed by Chen (2006). 120 JOB CREATION IN A MULTI-SECTOR LABOUR MARKET MODEL D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 cannot afford to search for long for jobs in the advantaged segments, instead preferring to take up easy-entry paid employment or other easy-entry jobs they often create themselves. On the other hand, there are others who had been paid employees in the advantaged segments who then chose to leave such jobs and set up their own self-employment activities. A large empirical literature confirms this duality within informal employment,2 in a diverse list of countries including Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia (Perry et al., 2007), Cameroon (Nguimkeu, 2014), Cote dIvoire (Gunther and Launov, 2012), Dominican Republic (Perry et al., 2007), Egypt (Harati, 2013), India (Sahoo and Neog, 2017), and Mexico (Pages and Stampini, 2009), for example.3 The second feature of the world which we incorporate into our model is differences in worker capital, whether human or physical, that can evolve over time with the accumula- tion of job experience (Becker, 1964). Evidence from interviews (Balan et al., 1975; Fields, 1990; Maloney, 2004), as well as individual profiles of self-employed workers (Jutting et al., 2008), argues in favour of a lifecycle model, in which for a young worker, wage em- ployment makes possible the accumulation of skills and savings that can be later used to enter the upper tier of self-employment. Similarly in the USA, as well as in Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico, Evans and Leighton (1989) and Bosch and Maloney (2005) respectively find that entry into self-employment is more likely among older workers compared to younger workers. Gunther and Launov (2012) find two distinctive segments within infor- mal employment in Cote dIvoire each with a different wage equation. The study concludes that returns to education and experience are indeed higher in the higher-paid segment. The third feature of the world that we bring into our analysis is heterogeneous pathways to self-employment, respectively free-entry self-employment and high-paying self- employment. While free-entry self-employment by definition accommodates the poorest and least-skilled workers, workers may be barred from entry into high-paying self-employ- ment because of a lack of capital and skills (Blanchflower and Oswald, 1998; Bandiera et al., 2013). McGrath et al. (1995) synthesize earlier studies on the various pathways to self-employment (e.g. Grierson, 1993) and singles out wage employment as one such meas- ure. Based on empirical evidence from Argentina, Mexico, and Brazil, Pages and Stampini (2009) conclude that worker mobility into self-employment from paid formal jobs is in fact higher than mobility in the reverse direction.4 Outside Latin America, this pattern of self- employment entry has also been found in Eastern and South Africa (Haan, 2001), Kenya (Higgins and Kalan, 2013), as well as in developed countries such as Denmark (Iversen et al., 2016). 2 The definitions of informal employment in these studies vary. With the exception of Harati (2013), self-employment is included in these studies either as a standalone labour market state, or as part of informal employment defined to include both self-employed workers and informal wage workers. 3 The literature disagrees about the relative importance of the two. See for example Fields (1990) and Maloney (2004). 4 It may be argued that observed transitions from formal paid employment to informal self- employment are results of layoffs and turnover rather than voluntary choice. Perry et al. (2007) report evidence from select Latin American countries which found that some workers indeed strictly prefer self-employment over formal paid employment (e.g. independence, flexibility, and higher earnings). Pages and Stampini (2009) find evidence of a self-employment premium relative to formal jobs. A.K. BASU ET AL. 121 D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 The fourth feature we incorporate is heterogeneity in an individuals ability to enter into upper-tier self-employment and earn higher income from it. This is a common feature in models of self-employment such as Fiess et al. (2010), and reflects the reality that ability in self-employment is worker-specific (e.g. Perry et al., 2007). In this paper, we build a model incorporating the preceding stylized features of develop- ing country labour markets. The model has four labour market states: three employment sectorstermed wage employment, free-entry self-employment, and high-wage self- employmentplus unemployment. Workers choose among two search strategies: a risky search strategy, which results in wage employment if successful but unemployment if un- successful, and a safe search strategy, which results in free-entry self-employment (but at low wages) with certainty. Further, we assume that a worker has to spend some time in the wage employment sector in order to acquire skills and finance to make entrepreneurship feasible. But individuals differ in their abilities as entrepreneurs, and this is a further factor in their decisions on search strategy. This also highlights the time dimension of the model workers live for two periods, and can make rational choices regarding job search in each of these periods. The distinction between youth and older workers thus emerges as a natural feature of the model. In the model, we allow for a large number of workers making such choices and facing such constraints. We solve for the market equilibrium of the model. The solution is suffi- ciently tractable that a range of comparative static exercises can be carried out. These com- parative static exercises will in turn provide answers to the three questions we pose at the outset. This paper is related to several strands of the literature on labour markets in developing economies. First, we contribute to models of informal sector employment by explicitly introducing three sources of heterogeneity in the labour market: heterogeneity within self- employment, heterogeneity in pathways to self-employment, and heterogeneity in age, all within a framework where wage employment, self-employment, and unemployment co- exist. Closely related to our work, Bennett and Rablen (2014) model labour markets where informal wage employment, self-employment, and informal entrepreneurship coexist.5 Nguimkeu (2014) models individuals choices between easy-entry subsistence informal em- ployment and upper-tier self-employment, where self-employment is subject to credit con- straints following Evans and Jovanovic (1989), Bosch and Maloney (2005), and Fiess et al. (2010). Unemployment, a central consideration in our analysis, is ruled out in these papers. In addition, heterogeneous pathways to self-employment and heterogeneous job experience are not featured in these papers. We show that these considerations in combination allow 5 Bennett and Rablen (2014) consider a setting with voluntary and involuntary self-employment, for- mal and informal wage employment, and formal and informal entrepreneurship. Our model incorpo- rates high-wage employment, high-paying self-employment, low-wage free-entry work, and unemployment. A key policy variable in Bennett and Rablen (2014) is a workers skill vector. The paper examines in a static one-period model the conditions under which different labour market states co-exist, and how changes in a workers skill vector lead to transitions from one employment state to another at the individual workers level. In our model, the main policy variable is high-wage employment. We work with an overlapping generations model with two generations of workers at any given time, and investigate the co-determination of individual-level job search strategies by all workers, and the resulting market-level allocation of workers in the different labour market states. 122 JOB CREATION IN A MULTI-SECTOR LABOUR MARKET MODEL D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 us to make age-specific predictions about how unemployment responds to policy shocks. We show that these age-specific responses are potent enough to generate non-monotonic general equilibrium comparative statics responses of unemployment with respect to an in- crease in high-wage employment opportunities.6 Another closely related paper is Banerjee and Newman (1993), which combines individual-level choices (between entrepreneurship and wage employment) and market-level outcomes. Banerjee and Newman (1993) do not account for duality within self-employment, however, or the pathways towards self- employment. Second, we show that the incorporation of heterogeneous pathways into self- employment can yield insights into the mechanisms that may have driven a number of mixed empirical findings in the literature. For example, Gindling et al. (2016) and Loayza and Rigolini (2006) employ cross-country panel data analyses and find evidence of counter- cyclical behaviourinformal employment (inclusive of self-employment) expands during adverse economic shocks while formal employment contracts. By contrast, Boeri and Garibaldi (2006) and Evans and Leighton (1989) find evidence of procyclicality of self- employment in Brazil and the USA, respectively. In our model, free-entry self-employment is weakly decreasing with respect to exogenous increases in formal employment due, for ex- ample, to productivity change, but high-paying self-employment responds to the same changes in the opposite direction. Third, the Todaro Paradox has inspired a large body of subsequent theoretical and em- pirical studies (e.g. Arellano, 1981; Zenou, 2011).7 We revisit the Todaro Paradox in this paper, with the additional emphasis that wage employment is no longer the best employ- ment outcome a worker can expect compared to high-wage self-employment for at least some workers. Nonetheless, wage employment presents a necessary first step to high-wage self-employment for these workers. This new setting calls for an amendment to the policy rationale for expanding wage employment as development strategy: to increase the number of relatively high-paying job opportunities for some workers, as well as to facilitate the transition to even better self-employment options for others. In this regard, our model is complementary to a large body of work to date on the labour market implications of safe and risky search, and the corresponding justifications for policy interventions such as safety nets and wage subsidies, for example (Vodopivec, 2009; Robalino et al., 2011; Margolis et al., 2012; Charlot et al., 2016; Docquier et al., 2017). 2. Model 2.1 Setup of the model In what follows, we describe the conditions characterizing a multi-sector labour market in a steady state, in the sense that the labour allocations across search strategies ex ante and labour market states ex post, to be described below, remain constant over time. 6 In Bennett and Rablen (2014), non-monotonicity of a different type arisesan increase in a work- ers skill can lead the worker to move from one employment state to a second, then a third, and back to the first. 7 For a survey of this long-standing literature, see for example Lall et al. (2006). A.K. BASU ET AL. 123 D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 2.1.1 Overlapping generations and workforce The economy is made up of overlapping generations of workers with two-period lives (youth and adulthood). Youth are denoted by small letters, adults by capital letters, and total by script capital letters. So, for example, ej denotes the employment of youth in sector j, Ej denotes the employment of adults in sector j, and Ej ejEj. Workers work during both periods of their lives, and q denotes the dis- count factor. The number of workers in each generation will be denoted as L. The size of the economys workforce, including young and adult workers, is thus 2L in every period. 2.1.2 Sectors of employment and wages The economy has three sectors of employment, respectively termed wage employment (EW  EW  eW ), free-entry self-employment (EF  EF  eF), and high-paying self-employment (EH  EH  eH). Unemployment (U  U  u) constitutes a fourth labour market state.8 Once a worker finds employment in a sector, he can keep that employment for the two periods of his life, i.e. there is no invol- untary labour turnover. Wages and employment are determined as follows. In the wage employment sector (W), employers set the wage, wW ; exogenously at a level above that of the free-entry self- employment sector. This may be for institutional reasons (e.g. minimum wages,9 labour unions10), market reasons (i.e. efficiency wages),11 or a combination of the two. Adults and youth are perfect substitutes in production, and therefore employers are indifferent between hiring an adult and hiring a youth for any job vacancy.12 Employers demand workers (EW  EW  eW ) such that the net labor cost wW equals the marginal product of the last worker hired: EW wW ; aW   fEW j@G EW ; aW =@EW  wWg; (1) where total revenue in the wage employment sector GEW ; aW exhibits positive and strict- ly decreasing marginal value product of labor. aW is a wage employment demand shifter, with @2GEW ; aW=@EW@aW > 0. From (1), job creation in the formal sector EWwW ; aW occurs whenever aW rises at constant wW . 13 The free-entry sector, F, is one where any worker who desires a job can find one. The free-entry wage is assumed invariant to the number of workers in the sector. This wage is denoted by wF. 8 This setup can accommodate both an urban labour market or an urban-rural labour market struc- ture. In particular, the free-entry self-employment can be interpreted either as part of the urban informal sector or as a rural agricultural sector. Free-entry self-employment may also be inter- preted as free-entry wage employment. In our setting, whether we assume one way or another will not make a difference to the conclusions we draw. 9 See for example Freeman (1996), who presents redistribution as a rationale for the minimum wage, and Fields and Kanbur (2007), who analyse the poverty implications of a minimum wage. 10 See for example, OECD (1996) for a discussion of the role of labour union in developing country labour markets. 11 See Stiglitz (1976) for one of the earliest attempts to use efficiency wage to explain the co- existence of unemployment and a positive wage in wage employment. 12 Gunther and Launov (2012) find that experience and education are important determinants of earnings in high-paying segments of informal employment. However, experience and education have very little to no influence on earnings in the low-paying segment. 13 To see this, note from (1) that @EW wW ; aW @aW   @2G EW ; aW  @EW @aW = @2G EW ; aW  @EW @EW > 0: 124 JOB CREATION IN A MULTI-SECTOR LABOUR MARKET MODEL D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 The high-paying self-employment sector, H, is not free entry. An important innovation of this paper is that in order to have the skills and resources to enter high-paying self-em- ployment,14 a worker must have worked in the wage employment sector for at least one period. Therefore, all workers in the high-paying self-employment sector are adults, but not all adults are able to enter this sector, or if able, not all choose to. Whether a worker with the skills and resources to enter high-paying self-employment chooses to enter or not depends on how high the pay is for that worker, which in turn depends on an individual productivity/utility parameter h, which is known to the worker (Evans and Jovanovic, 1989).15 We assume h in each generation is distributed uniformly and symmetrically around zero, with h 2 h; h. If a worker with the required skills and resources chooses to engage in high-paying self-employment, he would earn what he would have earned had he remained in wage employment (wW ) plus the individual-specific money equivalent wage income for him. Only workers who would earn more in high-paying self- employment than in wage employment would choose to leave wage employment in favor of high-paying self-employment.16 A worker who enters high-paying self-employment would earn wW  h.17 Given that high-paying self-employment lasts one periodadulthoodthe marginal worker who is just indifferent between wage employment and high-paying self-employment is endowed with a bh defined implicitly as wW  bh  wW , or equivalently bh  0: (2) 2.1.3 Choosing among search strategies In order to select between search strategies, workers (both adult and young) evaluate the expected values associated with each strategy and choose whichever is higher. Let Vi and vi denote the expected values of search strategy 14 In our formulation, high-paying entrepreneurs are self-employed individuals. We do so to match a salient feature of small and medium-size enterprises in the developing world, namely, that a sig- nificant fraction are one-person enterprises. For example, the shares of one-person enterprises in the mid-1990s were 65% in Botswana, 79% in Lesotho, 69% in Swaziland, and 69% in Zimbabwe (Haan, 2001). 15 Following the recent literature on the task composition of jobs, we distinguish the ability to be successful in entrepreneurship from the ability to be more productive in wage employment. Entrepreneurial ability varies across individuals, but productivity in wage employment is assumed to be the same for all individuals. 16 The model can be readily modified to allow the pool of heterogeneous high-paying self-employed to hire workers from the pool of free-entry self-employed workers at the market wage wF . As long as there is positive free-entry employment, it can be readily verified, with a few additional nota- tions, that the search strategy choices made by young or old workers, as well as the overall find- ings of this paper, remain qualitatively unchanged. We assume that workers are sufficiently capital constrained that formal entrepreneurship is not feasible. 17 Since high-paying self-employed workers earn more than wage employees, while free-entry self- employed workers earn less, it follows that the average self-employed worker may earn more or less than wage employees. This is consistent, with evidence presented in Gindling et al. (2016) in which penalties and premia of self-employed workersbroadly defined as those who self- identify as either an own account worker or an owner/employerrelative to wage employment have both been observed across countries, as well as within countries but across years (Table A1 in Gindling et al. (2016). A.K. BASU ET AL. 125 D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 https://academic.oup.com/oep/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/oep/gpy029#supplementary-data i  r; s facing adult and young workers, respectively. Also let Ji and ji denote the number of adult and young workers, respectively, who adopt the risky search strategy, and also denote J r  Jr  jr. Let us start with an adult worker who is not yet in high-wage employment and who adopts the risky search strategy. The expected value associated with this search strategy is the wage in wage employment, if successful, multiplied by the probability of success: Vr  pwW : (3) Observe that since adults have only one period of work life remaining, the possibility of entering high-paying self-employment does not arise, and therefore Vrp is independent of the payoff to that worker of being in high-paying self-employment. Employers are assumed to choose randomly from among the pool of workers who have adopted the risky search strategy, who will be called risky job seekers, to fill any job open- ing in the wage employment sector. Each risky job seeker faces the same probability of being hired for wage employment as any other; this probability is given by p  job openings in wage employment total number of risky job seekers : (4) Both the numerator and the denominator on the right-hand side are determined by a set of complicated relationships that will be explained in detail later. For an adult worker who adopts the safe search strategy, the expected value is simply the wage in the free-entry sector: Vs  wF: (5) Now for a young worker who adopts the risky strategy, the expected value vr depends on whether he is a high h or a low h worker. For a high h worker who adopts the risky search strategy, he finds wage employment at wW as a young worker with probability p, knowing that a period later, he will move into high-paying self-employment at wW  h. If he adopts the risky search strategy and is unsuccessful, which occurs with probability 1 p, the young worker is unemployed for one period, but retains the option to choose between the two search strategies once again a period later as an adult. The associated option value is maxfVr; Vsg, appropriately discounted by the discount factor q. Now for a low h young worker who adopts the risky search strategy, with probability p he will obtain a job in the high-wage sector in the first period of his life and will retain that job in the second period of his life, thus earning wW in both periods. If such a worker is unsuccessful in period 1, which occurs with probability 1 p, the worker is unemployed for that period, and a period later, he can again choose between the risky and the safe strategies, with associated value maxfVr; Vsg, appropriately discounted. In summary, for a young person entering the labour market for the first time, vr p; h   pwW  qwW  h   1 pqmaxfVrp;Vsg if h > bh pwW1 q  1 pqmaxfVrp; Vsg otherwise 8<: (6) Observe that vr p; h  is continuous in h, strictly increasing in h among high h workers, and independent of h among low h workers. In other words, comparing high and low h work- ers, high h workers derive larger benefits from the risky strategy than do low h workers. 126 JOB CREATION IN A MULTI-SECTOR LABOUR MARKET MODEL D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 Turning now to a young worker who adopts the safe search strategy in period 1, this worker is guaranteed a period 1 income of wF in the free-entry sector. In period 2, the worker chooses between the two search strategies again, and this offers maxfVr p ; Vsg. To a young worker, the expected value of adopting the safe search strategy in period 1 (though not necessarily in period 2) is thus vs p   wF  qmax Vr p ;Vsf g: (7) This concludes the setup of the model. 3. Equilibrium A steady-state equilibrium in this economy is a time-invariant allocation of adult and young workers ex ante search strategies (J r  Jr  jr ), and a time-invariant allocation of adult and young workers ex postx post employment outcomes (EW  EW  eW ; EF  EF  eF; EH  EH  eH ; and U  U  u) such that (1) each worker chooses a search strategy that maximizes expected utility (eqs (3), (5)(7)) conditional on the probability of wage employ- ment facing risky job seekers (eq. (4)); (2) employers make wage employment decisions according to eq. (1); (3) workers in high-paying self-employment receive wages according to eq. (2); and (4) workers in free-entry self-employment receive wF. We begin our analysis with an examination of the choice between risky and safe search strategies by adult as well as young workers. 3.1 Search behavior as a function of age and payoff to high-paying self-employment (h) Given the returns in the preceding section, which types of workeryoung or old, high h or low hwill adopt the risky search strategy in which order? The first to adopt risky search are the young high h workers starting with the highest h individual (i.e. the one with h  h), followed next by other high h young workers with suc- cessively lower hs, until we have gotten to the young individual whose h  0. The reason the first group of risky job seekers are young workers rather than adult workers is that young workers have two periods of high-paying work after a successful risky search, com- pared to adult workers who have only one period of work life remaining. The reason young workers engage in risky search in decreasing order of h is that young workers with higher hs would earn more in high-paying self-employment than would lower h workers. The next workers in line to adopt the risky search strategy are young low h workers. Within that group, start with one individual, whose value of h is indeterminate. More and more individuals within this group will engage in risky search until all do. The reason h does not matter is that young low h workers seek wage employment with the intention of staying in wage employment for two periods and not entering self-employment, and so the specific value of h, which determines how much they would earn in self-employment, is ir- relevant. The reason these low h young workers will adopt risky search before any adult workers do, even the highest h adult, is that low h young workers have two periods of high- paying work after a successful risky search, compared to an adult worker who receives a payoff for one period only. The last workers to choose risky search are older workers. The values of h do not matter for these adult workers, since the successful ones will work in wage employment for one A.K. BASU ET AL. 127 D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 period only, after which they must retire; they will never have the chance to work in high- wage self-employment. The proof that workers will engage in risky search in the order discussed in the three preceding paragraphs is as follows. The expected value gain from adopting the risky search strategy rather than the safe search strategy is vr p; h   vsp for young workers, and Vr p   Vs for adult workers. The difference between these two expected value gains vr p; h   vs p   Vr p   Vs for all h 2 h; h and p  1 can be written as vrp; h  vsp  Vrp  Vs   pqwW maxfpwW ;wFg maxf0;wW  hwWg  pqminf1 pwW ;wW wFg maxf0; hg: The last line can be seen to be a positive number as long as the wage in the free-entry sector, wF; does not exceed the wage in wage employment wWan assumption we have main- tained from the outsetwhich proves that young workers will engage in risky search before adult workers do. In addition, the last term in the last line is increasing in h for high h work- ers, for whom maxf0; hg  h, which proves that young high h workers engage in risky search before young low h workers. Then, young low h workers start engaging in risky search. For them, max 0; h  0:f As well, for them, the difference vr p; h   vs p   Vr p   Vs is simply pq minf 1 p wW ; wW wFg plus zero, also a positive number. This proves that young low h workers will engage in risky search after young high h workers do, but h does not affect which workers are so engaged. Thus, we have shown that the expected value gain from risky search for all young workers exceeds the expected value gain from risky search for all adult workers, and therefore adult workers will adopt risky search only after all young workers have already adopted risky search. The order in which adult workers choose risky search is in- determinate because Vrp and Vs are both independent of h.  Following this order, we then have five regimes: I. Some or all young high h workers adopt risky search. II. All young high h workers and some but not all low h workers adopt risky search. III. All young workers and no adult workers adopt risky search. IV. All young workers and some but not all adult workers adopt risky search. V. All workers, young and adult alike, adopt risky search. The set of five search behaviour regimes discussed above is an exhaustive characterization of all of the possible equilibrium combinations of search behaviours among adult and young job seekers in this model. In this section, our tasks are two-fold. For each regime, we will first present closed-form solutions for the equilibrium ex ante allocation of workers be- tween the two search strategies and the associated probability of wage employment, condi- tional on the equilibrium occurring in that specific regime. Next, we seek the conditions under which an equilibrium will indeed arise in each of the five regimes. 3.1.1 Regime I: only young high h workers adopt risky search A regime I equilibrium occurs when only young high h workers adopt risky search, and the rest of the young work- ers and all adult workers adopt safe search. Denote the h of the young high h worker who is just indifferent between risky search and safe search as ~h. For this high h worker, the expected value associated with risky search vrp; ~h is equal to that of safe search vs p . Furthermore, in a regime where only young high h workers adopt risky search, our discus- sion in Section 2.2 implies that for an adult the expected value associated with risky search 128 JOB CREATION IN A MULTI-SECTOR LABOUR MARKET MODEL D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 Vr p   pwW must be less than that of safe search (Vs  wF). Thus, the h of the indiffer- ent worker, ~h, is implicitly defined by: vr p; ~h    vs p  () p wW  q wW  ~h  h i  1 p qmax Vr p ;Vsf g  wF  qmax Vr p ;Vsf g () p wW  q wW  ~h  h i  1 p qVs  wF  qVs () p wW  q wW  ~h  h i  1 p qwF  wF  qwF () p  wF wW  q wW  ~h wF   : (8) Given ~h, the total number of risky job seekers is equal to the number of high h workers with h at least as high as ~h, or: J r  L h  ~h 2h ! (9) To determine the probability of wage employment in this regime (p), recall (4): p  job openings in wage employment total number of risky job seekers : The denominator, total number of risky job seekers, is as given by (9). The numerator, job openings in wage employment, is given by total wage employment demand EW net of the number of wage employment stayers in each period. In regime I, in which only young high h workers adopt risky search and do so with the intention of leaving wage employment to enter high-paying self-employment after one period of wage employment, the number of wage employment stayers is equal to zero. Thus, job openings in wage employment  EW  0  EW : (10) Substituting (9) and (10) into the definition of p, we have p  2 h EW L h  ~h   (11) in regime 1. Equations (8) and (11) are a pair of simultaneous equations in two unknowns ~h and p. In what follows, we will use an asterisk to denote equilibrium values. Solving (8) and (11), and substituting the solution ~h  back into (9), we obtain the equilibrium number of job seekers J r : J r  EWwW  qwW  h wF wF  2EWqh=L : (12) In addition, the corresponding equilibrium probability of wage employment is: p  wF  2q hEW=L wW  q wW  h wF   (13) if EW is strictly positive, and zero otherwise. The closed-form solutions in (12) and (13) A.K. BASU ET AL. 129 D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 show the equilibrium number of risky job seekers and the associated wage employment probability in a regime I equilibrium. 3.1.2 Regime II: all young high h Workers and Some Young Low h workers adopt risky search A regime II equilibrium occurs when all young high h workers plus some young low h workers adopt risky search, while the rest of the young workers and all adult workers adopt safe search. In such an equilibrium, for a young low h worker, the expected value of risky search vrp; h is equal to the expected value of safe search vs p ; this condition is analysed further below. Meanwhile, for an adult worker, the expected value of risky search must be less than the expected value of safe search. Thus, max Vr p ; Vs  Vs  wFf . Further analysing the condition for young workers, it follows that for all low h young workersthat is, those for whom h < bh  0we have that vr p; ~h    vs p  () p wW 1 q    1 p qmax Vr p ;Vsf g  wF  qmax Vr p ;Vsf g () p wW 1 q    1 p qwF  wF  qwF () p wW 1 q   qwF   wF () p  wF wW  q wW wF   bp: (14) Equation (14) shows that for a young low h worker to be indifferent between the two search options, the wage employment likelihood must be exactly equal to bp as shown. Note that the free-entry wage, the wage employment wage, and the discount factor all play a role in the determination of this threshold wage employment probability. In particular, when faced with a higher free-entry wage, a lower wage employment wage, or a lower discount factor, a higher-wage employment likelihood will be required if a low h young worker is to continue to remain indifferent between the two search options. This will happen provided that there are few enough job openings in wage employment that young low h workers are able to allocate themselves among search strategies in order to equalize the expected values associated with the two of them. In regime II where all L=2 young high h workers adopt risky search with the intention of leaving wage employment to enter high-paying self-employment after one period of wage employment and where all L=2 young low h workers who adopt risky search enter wage employment with the intention of staying two periods, the number of wage employment stayers is equal to the total number of low h workers in wage employment. With J r being the total number of risky job seekers, the number of low h risky job seekers is J r  L=2. A fraction p of these will obtain wage employment when young and will remain in wage employment as adults. It follows that job openings in wage employment will arise for two reasonsto replace older workers who retire and to replace young high h workers who start in high-wage employment and move to self-employmentin which case: job openings in wage employment  EW  p J r  L=2 : (15) Taking the ratio of job openings in wage employment as given by (15) to the total number of risky job seekers gives the following value of p from (4): 130 JOB CREATION IN A MULTI-SECTOR LABOUR MARKET MODEL D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 p  EW  p J r  L=2 J r : (16) Equations (14) and (16) are a pair of simultaneous equations in two unknowns J r and p. Solving, we obtain the equilibrium number of job seekers J r in regime II: J r  1 2 EW p  L 2    1 2 EW wW 1 q   qwF  wF  L 2   : (17) From (14), the corresponding equilibrium wage employment probability in regime II is: p  wF wW  q wW wF   bp: (18) To recall, bp is the largest value of p consistent with a regime I equilibrium for the last indif- ferent risky job seeker with ~h  bh  0. Equations (17) and (18) are respectively the closed- form solutions for the number of risky job seekers and the corresponding wage employment likelihood in regime 2. 3.1.3 Regime III: all young workers and no adult workers adopt risky search A regime III equilibrium occurs when all young workers adopt risky search, while all adult workers adopt safe search. In this equilibrium it must first of all be the case that the expected values of risky search among high and low h young workers are higher than their respective expected values of safe search. As shown in Section 2, the expected value gains from risky search among young high h workers are never lower than those of young low h workers, and so it suffices to require the expected value of risky search among young low h workers to be higher than the expected value of safe search. Equivalently, using (6) and (7) for young workers whose hs are less than the critical value bh, vr p; h   vs p  () p wW 1 q    1 p qmax Vr p ;Vsf g  wF  qmax Vr p ;Vsf g () p wW 1 q    1 p qwF  wF  qwF () p wW 1 q   qwF   wF () p  bp: (19) Since no adults adopt risky search in this regime, it must also be the case that the expected value of risky search for an adult worker is less than his expected value of safe search Vr p   pwW < Vs  wF: Vr p  < Vs () p < wF wW : (20) Henceforth, we will denote the right-hand side of (20) above as wF wW  p and understand p as the wage employment probability that renders an adult worker indif- ferent between the safe and risky search strategies in regime III. A.K. BASU ET AL. 131 D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 Since bp  wF wW 1 q   qwF and given that a maintained assumption of the model is that wW > wF; it follows that bp is less than p. For a range of values of p 2  bp;p, (19) and (20) together imply that all L young workers adopt risky search, while all L adult workers choose the safe search strategy. In regime III, where all young workers adopt risky search and no adult workers do, the total number of wage employment stayers is equal to the total number of low h workers in wage employment, or p times half of the total young workforce L=2. It follows that: job openings in wage employment  EW  pL=2: (21) Taking the ratio of (21) to total number of risky job seekers, we obtain using (4): p  EW  pL=2J r (22) In a regime III equilibrium, where the total number of risky job seekers is equal to the total number of young workers L: J r  L: (23) Substituting the above into (22), the equilibrium wage employment probability in regime III is thus p  2EW 3L : (24) Equations (23) and (24) are the closed-form solutions for the number of risky job seekers and the wage employment probability in a regime III equilibrium. 3.1.4 Regime IV: all young workers and some adult workers adopt risky search A regime IV equilibrium occurs when all young workers plus some adult workers adopt risky search. In such an equilibrium, the expected value of risky search for an adult worker is equal to the expected value of safe search. Thus, Vr p   Vs () p  wF wW  p: (25) Equation (25) shows that for an adult worker to be indifferent between risky and safe search, the wage employment likelihood must be exactly equal to p as shown. Note that the ratio of the free-entry wage and the wage employment wage completely determines this threshold wage employment probability. Thus, a higher free-entry wage or a lower wage employment wage will result in an increase in the equilibrium likelihood that the risky search strategy will prove successful, the magnitude of the increase being just enough that an adult worker remains indifferent between risky search as compared with safe search. Unlike (14), which pertains to the choice of search strategy for young low h workers, the discount factor q plays no role in the choice of search strategy for adult workers, who have only one period of working life remaining. To determine the number of job openings in wage employment, note that in regime IV there are three types of workers in wage employment in every period: young high h workers 132 JOB CREATION IN A MULTI-SECTOR LABOUR MARKET MODEL D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 who leave after one period to enter high-paying self-employment, young low h workers who stay in wage employment for two periods, and adult workers who retire after one period. The numbers of workers in these three groups are respectively pL=2; pL=2; and pJ r  L adult workers who retire after one period. It follows that the total number of wage employment stayers is simply given by the number of low h young workers in wage employment, pL=2, and thus: job openings in wage employment  EW  pL=2: (26) p; the probability of wage employment, from (4), is therefore: p  EW  pL=2J r : (27) Combining (25) and (27), we obtain the equilibrium number of risky job seekers in regime IV as J r  EW p  L 2  EWwW wF  L 2 : (28) And from (4), the corresponding wage employment probability as p  wF wW  p: (29) 3.1.5 Regime V: all adopt risky search In this final regime, all workers, young and adult, adopt risky search. In an equilibrium in this regime, the expected value of risky search of an adult worker is strictly greater than the expected value of safe search, i.e. Vr p   Vs () p  wF wW  p: (30) Furthermore, in such an equilibrium, the total number of risky job seekers is equal to J r  2 p L (31) as discussed before. Of these risky job seekers, L=2 are young high h workers, L=2 are young low h workers, and 1 pL are adult workers who failed to find wage employment while young. It follows that the number of wage employment stayers in this regime is equal to p times the number of young low h risky job seekers, or pL=2. In regime V, therefore: job openings in wage employment  EW  pL=2: (32) Taking the ratio of job openings in wage employment to risky job seekers, the probability of wage employment, from (4), is: p  EW  pL=2 total number of risky job seekers : (33) Equations (31) and (33) are a pair of simultaneous equations in two unknowns, J r and p. Solving, we obtain: 0  p 2  5 2 p  EWL A.K. BASU ET AL. 133 D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 which is a quadratic equation in p. The two roots are given by 5 4 6 ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi 5 4  2  EWL s : Picking the root that does not exceed unity, the equilibrium wage employment probability and the number of risky job seekers are p  5 4  ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi 5 4  2  EWL s ; (34) and J r  3L 4  ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi 5L 4  2  EWL s : (35) 3.1.6 Boundaries of the five regimes Having established the five equilibria, the boundaries that mark the beginning and the end of each of the five regimes can be expressed purely in terms of wage employment according to the following jointly exhaustive and mutually ex- clusive ranges of wage employment, EW=L: Regime I if EW L 2 0; bp 2   Regime II if EW L 2 bp 2 ; 3bp 2  Regime III if EW L 2 3bp 2 ; 3p 2  Regime IV if EW L 2 3p 2 ; p 5 2  p   Regime V if EW L 2 p 5 2  p   ; 3 2 : 8>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>><>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>: The formal proofs are relegated to the appendix. Intuitively, the above shows that succes- sive increases in wage employment opportunities pull in workers to engage in risky search, starting from workers with the highest returns to risky search (high-ability young workers in regime I), to those with the lowest returns (adult workers not in high-paying self- employment in regime V), sequentially covering each of the five regimes along the way. Uniqueness of equilibrium in each regime can also be established, and the details are avail- able in the appendix. 4. Comparative statics In this section, we present the comparative statics properties of the labour market equilib- rium with respect to different values of wage employment demand through changes in EW across the five regimes of interest. Specifically, we focus on the three questions set out in the outset of this paper: (1) unemployment; (2) wage employment; and (3) high-paying self- employment and free-entry self-employment in the five successive regimes. 134 JOB CREATION IN A MULTI-SECTOR LABOUR MARKET MODEL D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 4.1 Unemployment Unemployment as an ex post labour market outcome arises whenever some worker engages in risky search and fails to find wage employment. The likelihood of this event facing a risky job seeker is 1 p. With the total number of risky job seekers being given by J r; total un- employment U  u U is equal to 1 pJ r . Table 1 shows the equilibrium level of total unemployment normalized by the size of the total workforce. Among the U un- employed workers, total youth unemployment is 1 p times the number of risky young job seekers. Since only young workers engage in risky search in regimes IIII, u  1 p jr  1 pJ r . In regimes IV and V, all young workers engage in risky search; it follows that u  1 p L in those regimes. Thus, collecting results from Section 3 for each of the five regimes on pand J r , the fraction of youth who are unemployed is given by: u L EW L wWq wWhwF   wF 2hqEW L   EWL 1bp 2 1bpEWL 12   12 3 EW L   1p  1 4  ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi 5 4  2 EWL s0@ 1A if EW L in Reg: I if EW L in Reg: II if EW L in Reg: III if EW L in Reg: IV if EW L in Reg: V 8>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>><>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>: (36) Meanwhile, total adult unemployment is given by U  U  u, or U L  0 if EW L in Reg: I; II or III 1p  1 p EW L  3 2   if EW L in Reg: IV 1 4  ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi 5 4  2 EWL s0@ 1A2 if EWL in Reg: V 8>>>>>>>>>><>>>>>>>>>>: (37) Figures 1a and 1b illustrate total unemployment, youth unemployment, and adult Table 1. Ex post labour market equilibrium Regime U=L EH=L EF=L I EWL wWq wWhwF  wF 2qhEW L    EWL EWL 2 EWL  EWL wWq wWhwF wF2hqEWL II 1p2 1 p EW L  12   p 2 2 1p2p EW L  1p4 III 1 23 EW L   1 3 EW L 1 23 EW L IV 1 p  1p EW L  12   p 2 2 p   1p EW L  12   V  14 ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi 5 4  2  EWLq  34 ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi54 2  EWLq  12 54 ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi54 2  EWLq  0 Source: Authors calculation. A.K. BASU ET AL. 135 D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 unemployment as functions of wage employment demand EW=L. In Fig. 1a, the spread of h is assumed to be sufficiently small, while in Fig. 1b, a sufficiently larger spread is assumed.18 Focusing first on Fig. 1a, total unemployment U is twin-peakedstrictly increas- ing in regimes I and II, strictly decreasing in regime III, strictly increasing again in regime IV, and finally decreasing to zero in regime V. The intuition behind the non-monotonicity of U (a) (b) Fig. 1. (a) Unemployment (total, adult, and youth) with small spread in h. (b) Unemployment (total, adult, and youth) with large spread in h. 18 The proofs of these claims are relegated to Appendix B. 136 JOB CREATION IN A MULTI-SECTOR LABOUR MARKET MODEL D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 https://academic.oup.com/oep/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/oep/gpy029#supplementary-data with respect to EW=L is as follows. In regimes I and II, where only young workers are risky job seekers, an increase in wage employment demand DEW encourages more than DEW young workers to engage in risky job search, thereby adding to youth unemployment.19 Up to this point, adult workers do not engage in risky search, and as such adult unemploy- ment is equal to zero. As EW rises even further, regime III now applies, where all young workers and no adult workers adopt risky search. Raising wage employment demand in the interior of this regime increases the number of wage employment jobs, while the number of risky job seekers remains constant at L in this regime. According to (24), an increase in EW thus serves to raise the likelihood of wage employment, p: Consequently, youth unemployment falls, adult unemployment remains at zero, and thus total unemployment strictly decreases with- in regime III. As wage employment demand rises further, we come to a point where we leave regime III and enter regime IV. Additional wage employment demand now induces adult workers to participate in risky search. In this regime, a given increase in wage employment demand DEW encourages risky search among adult workers by more than DEW , raising adult unemployment. Meanwhile, youth unemployment remains unchanged at 1 p L, since the increase in wage employment demand and adult risky search behavior balance each other out in such a way that the likelihood of wage employment is constant and equal to p in regime IV; see (29). Thus, total unemployment necessarily increases, giving rise to a second peak in total unemployment at the threshold wage employment demand between regimes IV and Vthat is, at EW=L  p5=2 p, when all adult and young workers are engaged in risky search. Thereafter, any further increase in wage employment demand pro- duces a strict decline in total unemployment. The reasons are two-fold. First, with all job seekers already participating in risky search, raising wage employment raises the number of young workers that successfully achieve wage employment while young, but decreases the total number of remaining adults who can participate in risky search upon reaching adult- hood. As shown in (35), the total number of risky job seekers J r decreases with EW . Furthermore, from (34), the likelihood of wage employment p rises with wage employ- ment demand here. Taken together, total unemployment 1 p J r must be decreasing in wage employment demand here. We turn now to Fig. 1b. As discussed, the difference between Figs 1a and 1b is in the spread of h. In particular, still continuing with the maintained assumption that h is distrib- uted uniformly on h; h] the larger h is, the more spread out the distribution of the payoff h to high-paying self-employment in regime I will be. With a more spread-out h distribu- tion, the same increase in wage employment demand draws in a proportionally smaller number of risky job seekers.20 Since unemployment is given by the total number of risky job seekers minus the number of available job openings J r  EW , unemployment can in fact decrease with EW=L in regime I if J r does not rise fast enough with EW , as would be 19 Appendix B provides a proof of this claim for regime I. In regime II, 1 L @U @EW  1p 2pL > 0 20 To see this, differentiate J r with respect to EW =L to obtain dlogJ r dlogEW   wF wF 2hqEW L   an expression that is strictly decreasing in h . A.K. BASU ET AL. 137 D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 https://academic.oup.com/oep/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/oep/gpy029#supplementary-data the case when the distribution of h is sufficiently spread out. This is precisely the case that Fig. 1b illustrates. Interestingly, this implies that the U schedule is now triple-peaked.21 4.2 The number working in high-paying self-employment High-paying self-employment in this economy EH consists of workers who (a) were in wage employment as youth, which enabled them to acquire the financial and human capital needed to enter self-employment; and (b) choose to enter self-employment because they can earn more there than they could in wage employment. Condition (b) limits us to high h indi- viduals only. Thus, EH is given simply by p times the total number of young high h individ- uals who undertake risky search. In regime I, the number of young high h individuals who undertake risky search is equal to J r itself. From regime II onwards, the total number of young high h individuals who undertake risky search is equal to Lhigh h  L=2. Thus, col- lecting results on pand J r from Section 3 for each of the five regimes: EH   EW Lbp 2 1 3 EW L p 2 1 2 5 4  ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi 5 4  2  EWL s0@ 1A if EW L in Reg: I if EW L in Reg: II if EW L in Reg: III if EW L in Reg: IV if EW L in Reg: V 8>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>><>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>: (38) Since only adult workers can enter high-paying self-employment, eH  0, and as such EH  EH. Figure 2 plots high-paying self-employment as a function of wage employ- ment demand EW=L. As shown, high-paying self-employment is strictly increasing in wage employment demand in regimes I, III, and V, and independent of wage employment de- mand in regimes II and IV. To see the intuition behind these variations in comparative stat- ics responses, note first that in regime I, every wage employment job is occupied by a young high h worker. It follows therefore that any increase in EW will increase high-paying self- employment EH one for one. Next, in regimes III and V, respectively all young workers, and all young and adult workers, are risky job seekers. Raising EW here increases the likeli- hood of wage employment for all risky job seekers, including high h young workers who plan to enter high-paying self-employment as adults. It follows that raising EW in these regimes increases high-paying self-employment. By contrast, in regimes II and IV, note from (18) and (29) that conditional on undertak- ing risky job search the likelihoods of wage employment are respectively constant at p  bp and p  p. It follows straightforwardly that increases in EW=L within these regimes will have no effect on the number of high-paying self-employed individuals since only high h individuals enter high-paying self-employment, and the number of such individ- uals is L=2, a constant in both regimes II and IV. 21 Appendix B demonstrates that U is inverted-U-shaped with respect to EW =L in the interior of regime I when h is sufficiently large. 138 JOB CREATION IN A MULTI-SECTOR LABOUR MARKET MODEL D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 https://academic.oup.com/oep/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/oep/gpy029#supplementary-data 4.3 The number working in free-entry self-employment Free-entry self-employment is given by the number of job seekers who adopt the safe search strategy. Among young workers, this is simply given by L  jr . From (41), eF L  1 EWL wW  q wW  h wF   wF  2hqEW L   1 1 2 1bp EWL  12   0 if EW L in Reg: I if EW L in Reg: II if EW L in Reg: III 8>>>>>>>>><>>>>>>>>>: (39) This relationship falls monotonically in regimes I and II, reaching zero at the end of regime II and remaining at zero thereafter. Turning to adult workers, there are two subgroups. The first adopted risky search while young but failed to gain wage employment; the number in this category is 1 pjr . The second chose safe search when young; their number is L  jr . The total number of adult job seekers is thus 1 p jr  L jr  L  pjr . (The remaining adult workers are not job seekers, because they have already found their best possible employment situation.) Of the L  pjr adult job seekers, some (Jr  choose risky Fig. 2. High-paying self-employment (total, adult, and youth). A.K. BASU ET AL. 139 D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 search as adults, leaving L  pjr  Jr as safe job searchers among adults. All of these safe job searchers end up in free-entry self-employment. We thus have: EF L  1 EWL 1 1 2 EW L  bp 2   1 2 3 EW L 2 p   1 p EW L  1 2   0 if EW L in Reg: I if EW L in Reg: II if EW L in Reg: III if EW L in Reg: IV if EW L in Reg: V 8>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>><>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>: (40) This number decreases monotonically in the first four regimes, reaching zero at the end of regime IV and remaining at zero in regime V. Summing adult and young workers in free-entry employment as given by (39) and (40), we have: EF L  2 EWL  EW L wW  q wW  h wF   wF  2hqEW L   2 1 bp 2bp EWL  1 bp4 1 2 3 EW L 2 p   1 p EW L  1 2   0 if EW L in Reg: I if EW L in Reg: II if EW L in Reg: III if EW L in Reg: IV if EW L in Reg: V 8>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>><>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>: (41) which is strictly decreasing with respect to EW=L in regimes IIV before reaching zero and remaining at zero in regime V. Figure 3 illustrates. 4.4 Summary of the effects of increased demand for labour in wage employment What we found in this section is that as the amount of wage employment increases: 1. Unemployment changes non-monotonically, rising in some regimes and falling in others (Figs 1a and 1b). 2. High-paying self-employment increases strictly in some regimes and is unchanged in others (Fig. 2). 3. Free-entry self-employment decreases monotonically or is unchanged depending on the regime (Fig. 3). Since the two forms of self-employment respond in opposite ways to an increase in wage employment, it is easy to check using Table 1 that self-employmentwhen defined to be 140 JOB CREATION IN A MULTI-SECTOR LABOUR MARKET MODEL D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 the sum of high-paying self-employment and free-entry self-employmentcan either de- crease (regimes 14) or increase (regime 5) as the amount of wage employment increases. 5. Conclusion This paper has incorporated four key heterogeneities into a canonical multi-sector labour market model: heterogeneity within self-employment, heterogeneity in job experience, het- erogeneity in pathways to self-employment, and heterogeneity in ability. We have shown that these heterogeneities can be brought together in tractable fashion to characterize equi- librium in a model whose features come closer to the realities of developing economies. The model has allowed us to ask questions which cannot be addressed in the standard model. Further, our richer setting shows that by accounting for generational differences in the motivations for job search, unemployment exhibits two distinct inverted-U relationships with high-wage employment, one for youth and another for adults. Interestingly, non- monotonicity in unemployment notwithstanding, increasing high-wage employment leads to an unambiguous increase in high-paying self-employment, and an unambiguous decrease in free-entry (low-wage) self-employment. These results highlight three sets of insights that are to date underappreciated in multi- sectoral models of labour markets in developing economies. First, the original Harris Todaro insights on the effectiveness of policies on labour market outcomes hold well when the relevant group of workers contemplating risky search is homogeneous in terms of abil- ity, and has a static decision time frame so that their assessment of the gains and opportun- ity costs of risky search are both homogeneous and one shot. In our setting, regime IV fits this description exactly. By introducing heterogeneous ability, we introduce regime I, in which the marginal risky job seeker has high ability, and makes the decision on whether to engage in risky search depending on the relative costs and ability-specific gains from doing so. By introducing two age groups, we introduce regime II, in which the benefits and Fig. 3. Free-entry self-employment (total, adult, and youth). A.K. BASU ET AL. 141 D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 opportunity cost of risky search depend explicitly on the dynamic considerations. In regime III, we are at a corner where policies do not affect the extent of risky search for either gener- ation: young workers are all choosing risky search and adult workers are all choosing safe search. On the other hand, in regime V, we have the other corner solution: all job seekers, young and old alike, engage in risky search. Second, our model also illustrates how aggregate labour market outcomes can mask much more nuanced comparative statics at the group/subgroup level. The unemployment responses of youth and adult workers to rising wage employment are good examples, where the two are shown to move in the same direction in one regime (V) and in different direc- tions in others (regimes IIV). Finally, our model provides a starting point for understanding a wide array of policies in a multi-sector labour market setting. For example, how does raising the free-entry self- employment wage impact labour market outcomes? Alternatively, what about an increase in the wage employment wage? In an earlier Working Paper version of this study, available upon request, we work out these responses and show that the four heterogeneities we intro- duce here can give rise to a number of new insights on the impact of policies on labour mar- ket outcomes.22 We hope our model has reinforced the value of multi-sector labour market modelling for developing countries while also demonstrating which earlier results are sustained and which are contradicted in an enriched structure. We look forward to extending this line of analysis in future work. Supplementary material Supplementary material is available online at the OUP website. This material consists of an online appendix. Acknowledgements We thank Juan David Robalino for outstanding research assistance in the preparation of this ver- sion of the paper and two anonymous referees for insightful comments and suggestions. References Arellano, J.-P. (1981) Do more jobs in the modern sector increase urban unemployment?, Journal of Development Economics, 8, 24147. Balan, J., Browning, H.L., and Jelin, E. (1975) Men in a developing society, Journal of Latin American Studies, 7, 338. Bandiera, O., Burgess, R., Das, N., Gulesci, S., Rasul, I., and Sulaiman, M. (2013) Can basic entrepreneurship transform the economic lives of the poor?, IZA Discussion Paper No. 7386, Bonn. 22 For example, it is straightforward to show that an increase in the free-entry self-employment wage weakly increases high-paying self-employment. This counterintuitive result arises because of an interesting intergroup spillover effect, where for example when low-ability young workers are lured away from formal wage employment, high-ability young workers in turn enjoy a higher chance of formal wage employment, and ultimately a higher chance of high-paying self- employment. 142 JOB CREATION IN A MULTI-SECTOR LABOUR MARKET MODEL D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 https://academic.oup.com/oep/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/oep/gpy029#supplementary-data https://academic.oup.com/oep/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/oep/gpy029#supplementary-data Banerjee, A.V. and Newman, A. (1993) Occupational choice and the process of development, Journal of Political Economy, 101, 27498. Becker, G. (1964) Human Capital, Columbia University Press, New York. Bennett, J. and Rablen, M.D. (2014) Self-employment, wage employment and informality in a developing economy, Oxford Economic Papers, 67, 22744. Blanchflower, D.G. and Oswald, A.J. (1998) What makes an entrepreneur?, Journal of Labor Economics, 16, 2660. Boeri, T. and Garibaldi, P. (2006) Shadow sorting, CEPR Discussion Paper 5487, London. Bosch, M. and Maloney, W. (2005) Labor market dynamics in developing countries: comparative analysis using continuous time Markov processes, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3583, Washington, DC. Charlot, O., Malherbet, F., and Ulus, M. (2016) Unemployment compensation and the allocation of labor in developing countries, Journal of Public Economic Theory, 18, 385416. Chen, M. (2006) Rethinking the informal economy: linkages with the formal sector and the formal regulatory environment, in B. Guha-Khasnobis, R. Kanbur, and E. Ostrom (eds) Linking the Formal and Informal Economy: Concepts and Policies, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 7592. Docquier, F., Muller, T., and Naval, J. (2017) Informality and long-run growth, Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 119, 104085. Evans, D.S. and Jovanovic, B. (1989) An estimated model of entrepreneurship choice under liquid- ity constraints, Journal of Political Economy, 97, 80827. Evans, D.S. and Leighton, L.S. (1989) The determinants of changes in U.S. self-employment, 19681987, Small Business Economics, 1, 11119. Fields, G.S. (1975) Rural-urban migration, urban unemployment and underemployment, and job search activity in LDCs, Journal of Development Economics, 2, 16588. Fields, G.S. (1989) On-the-job search in a labor market model: ex-ante choices and ex-post out- comes, Journal of Development Economics, 30, 15978. Fields, G.S. (1990) Labour market modeling and the urban informal sector: theory and evidence, in D. Turnham, B. Salome, and A. Schwarz (eds) The Informal Sector Revisited, Development Centre of the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development, Paris. Fields, G.S. (2014) Self-employment and poverty in developing countries, IZA World of Labor, doi:10.15185/izawol.60. Fields, G. and Kanbur, R. (2007) Minimum wages and poverty with income-sharing, Journal of Economic Inequality, 5, 13547. Fiess, N.M., Fugazza, M., and Maloney, W. (2010) Informal self-employment and macroeconom- ics fluctuations, Journal of Development Economics, 91, 21126. Freeman, R. (1996) The minimum wage as a redistributive tool, Economic Journal, 106, 63949. Gindling, T., Mossaad, N., and Newhouse, D. (2016) Earnings premiums and penalties for self-employment and informal employees around the world, IZA Journal of Labor & Development, 5, 20. Grierson, J.P. (1993) Self-employment in developing countries: analysing the effectiveness of enterprise-based training approaches, in new trends in training policies, NORRAG NN14, http://www.norrag.org/fileadmin/Full%20Versions/NN14.pdf (accessed 14 June 2018). Gunther, I. and Launov, A. (2012) Informal employment in developing countries, Journal of Development Economics, 97, 8898. Haan, H.C. (2001) Training for work in the informal sector: new evidence from Eastern and Southern Africa, International Training Centre of the International Labour Organization Occasional Papers, Turin. Harati, R. (2013) Heterogeneity in the Egyptian informal labour market: choice or obligation? Revue deconomie Politique, 123, 62339. A.K. BASU ET AL. 143 D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 http://www.norrag.org/fileadmin/Full%20Versions/NN14.pdf Harris, J. and Todaro, M. (1970) Migration, unemployment, and development: a two sector ana- lysis, American Economic Review, 40, 12642. Higgins, A. and Kalan, J. (2013) How young entrepreneurs are changing Nairobis economy, https://nextcity.org/features/view/the-improvisers-nairobis-youth-confront-a-future-with-few- formal-jobs (accessed 14 June 2018). Iversen, J., Malchow-Mller, N., and Srensen, A. (2016) Success in entrepreneurship: a comple- mentarity between schooling and wage-work experience, Small Business Economics, 47, 43760. Jutting, J., Parlevliet, J., and Xenogiani, T. (2008) Informal employment re-loaded, OECD Development Centre Working Paper 266, Paris. Lall, S.V., Selod, H., and Shalizi, Z. (2006) Rural-urban migration in developing countries: a sur- vey of theoretical predictions and empirical findings, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3915, Washington, DC. Lewis, A.W. (1954) Economic development with unlimited supplies of labour, Manchester School, 22, 13991. Loayza, N.V. and Rigolini, J. (2006) Informality trends and cycles, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series 4078, Washington, DC. Maloney, W.F. (2004) Informality revisited, World Development, 32, 115978. Margolis, D.N., Navarro, L., and Robalino, D.A. (2012) Unemployment insurance, job search and informal employment, IZA Discussion Papers 6660, Bonn. McGrath, S., King, K., Leach, F., and Carr-Hill, R. (1995) Education and Training for the Informal Sector: Volume 1, Occasional Papers on Education, Serial No. 11. https://files.eric.ed. gov/fulltext/ED400387.pdf. Nguimkeu, P. (2014) A structural econometric analysis of the informal sector heterogeneity, Journal of Development Economics, 107, 17591. OECD (1996) Trade, Employment and Labour Standards: A Study of Core Workers Rights and International Trade, OECD Publishing, Paris. Pages, C. and Stampini, M. (2009) No education, no good jobs? Evidence on the relationship be- tween education and labor market segmentation, Journal of Comparative Economics, 37, 387401. Perry, G.E., Maloney, W.F., Arias, O.S., Fajnzylber, P., Mason, A.D., and Saavedra-Chanduvi, J. (2007) Informality: Exit and Exclusion, World Bank, Washington, DC. Robalino, D.A., Zylberstajn, E., and Robalino, J.D. (2011) Incentive effects of risk pooling, redis- tributive and savings arrangements in unemployment benefit systems: evidence from a job-search model for Brazil, IZA Discussion Papers 5476, Bonn. Sahoo, B.K. and Neog, B.J. (2017) Heterogeneity and participation in informal employment among non-cultivator workers in India, International Review of Applied Economics, 31, 43767. Steel, W.F. and Takagi, Y. (1983) Small enterprise development and the employment-output trade-off, Oxford Economic Papers, 35, 42346. Stiglitz, J.E. (1976) The efficiency wage hypothesis, surplus labour, and the distribution of income in L.D.C, Oxford Economic Papers, 28, 185207. Vodopivec, M. (2009) Introducing unemployment insurance to developing countries, Social Protection Discussion Paper 0907, World Bank, Washington, DC. Zenou, Y. (2011) Rural-urban migration and unemployment: theory and policy implications, Journal of Regional Science, 51, 6582. 144 JOB CREATION IN A MULTI-SECTOR LABOUR MARKET MODEL D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /oep/article-abstract/71/1/119/5046029 by N ew York U niversity user on 06 M ay 2019 https://nextcity.org/features/view/the-improvisers-nairobis-youth-confront-a-future-with-few-formal-jobs https://nextcity.org/features/view/the-improvisers-nairobis-youth-confront-a-future-with-few-formal-jobs https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED400387.pdf https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED400387.pdf gpy029-FN1 gpy029-FN2 gpy029-FN3 gpy029-FN4 gpy029-FN5 gpy029-FN6 gpy029-FN7 gpy029-FN8 gpy029-FN9 gpy029-FN10 gpy029-FN11 gpy029-FN12 gpy029-FN13 gpy029-FN14 gpy029-FN15 gpy029-FN16 gpy029-FN17 gpy029-TF1 gpy029-FN18 gpy029-FN19 gpy029-FN20 gpy029-FN21 gpy029-FN22