untitled How to Make a Queer: The Erotics of Begging; or, Down and Out in the Great Depression Robert Dale Parker Abstract Across the fiction and poetry of the Great Depression, when the focus turns to men on the down and out, unable to find work and not knowing where they will find their next meal or place to sleep, a series of representative scenes reappears from one now often-forgotten story, novel, and poem to another. Collectively such scenes, recurring across the literature of the 1930s, offer something like a cousinly alternative, on a far smaller scale, to the 1930s ascen- dency of documentary and the 1920s and 1930s movement for a proletarian literature. Stories of begging for money or food, for example, took a variety of forms, and they also took on erotic connotations. This article reads the erotics of begging in little-known literature from the Great Depression, especially Tom Kromers Waiting for Nothing (1935), and argues that when a man on the down and out makes a queer, in effect also queering himself, he queers as well the masses of down-and-out unemployed men whose unloosed gender stirred up a national anxiety about precarious masculinity. Keywords poverty, 1930s, Tom Kromer, hobos The Poetics of the Stiff The Great Depression turned many thousands of people into beg- gars. Brother, Can You Spare a Dime?, the runaway popular song recorded by Bing Crosby in 1932, tells the story of a hardworking vet- eran who builds railroads and skyscrapers icons of US prosperity and can-do adaptabilitybut then finds himself reduced to begging for dimes and standing in line just waiting for bread. In the 1930s, the mass unemployment, hunger, and homelessness that helped make Brother, Can You Spare a Dime? the nations most popular song (Crosby 1932; Giddins 2001, 305) transformedor seemed to transformmany working men into walking dead bodies trapped in American Literature, Volume 91, Number 1, March 2019 DOI 10.1215/00029831-7335361  2019 by Duke University Press Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 hopeless paralysis as they begged for food and shelter. Across the fic- tion and poetry of the Great Depression, when the focus turns to men on the down and out, unable to find work and not knowing where they will find their next meal or place to sleep, a series of representa- tive scenes reappears from one now often-forgotten story, novel, and poem to another. Tom Kromers 1935 novel,Waiting for Nothing, calls these down-and-out men stiffs. Collectively, such scenes evoke what I will call the poetics of the stiff. The poetics of the stiff includes scenes of begging for money (Brotheror Buddycan you spare a dime?); begging for food at a restaurant, bakery, or butcher shop; standing in a breadline or soup line; staring through a restaurant window at hearty eaters who do not see or pretend not to see the staring stiffs; sleeping in a flophouse or an evangelical mission; hopping a freight car in the hope of finding things better somewhere else; and so on. Such scenes, recurring across the literature of the 1930s, offer some- thing like a cousinly alternative, on a far smaller scale, to the 1930s ascendency of documentary and the 1920s and 1930s movement for a proletarian literature. In a way that I have not seen writers or critics remark, the Depression stuck a stick in the spokes of the call, led by Mike Gold, for proletarian fiction and poetry, for writing that con- centrates on workers and their work.1 Stiffs were not workers. They wanted to work, but they could not find work. As Gavin Jones notes (2008, esp. 8), the two categories of workers and the poor are not the same. Jones argues that thinking of them as the same has led liter- ary critics to pay too little attention to the literature of poverty. Many stiffs were ex-workers, but many of them had fallen from a bourgeois past. If they found work, it led to regular meals and a reliable place to sleep, meaning that, so long as the work lasted, they were no longer stiffs. For that reason, a novel, story, or poem about stiffs could not live up to the calls to ground literature in portraits of workers and their work. It had to do something else. Stories of begging for money or food, a core scene in the poetics of the stiff, took a variety of forms, and they also took on erotic connota- tions. This article reads the erotics of begging in little-known litera- ture from the Great Depression, especially KromersWaiting for Noth- ing, and argues that life on the down and out leads down a zigzagging path that outs queerness.2 The outed queerness challenges conven- tional models of straightness, making it impossible to continue any charade that might convincingly deny or suppress queerness. When a 92 American Literature Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 culture tries to make heterosexuality and masculinity define each other, while trying as well to define both of them through work, and then takes away the work, it pressures its models of masculinity and heterosexuality to make visible the polymorphous possibilities that they have often suppressed about themselves. But it does not nec- essarily make queerness, masculinity, or heterosexuality finite, con- trollable, and readable. It may even expose them as unreadable. The literature of unreadable masculinity then outs heterosexuality and masculinity as more than one fused-together side of a supposedly binary opposition to homosexuality and femininity, as more capacious than one singular model of heterosexuality or masculinity. Making a Queer: Male-to-Male Exchange and the Confusion of Categories In the poetics of the encounter between the stiff and the nonstiff, beg- ging for money is characteristically, though not always, a male-to- male exchange, as in the refrain and title of Brother, Can You Spare a Dime? In 193435, 97 percent of unattached transients in the United States were male.3 But women driven to prostitution or sex work by the Depression also approached men and asked for money. InWaiting for Nothing, when Tom the representative hungry and ragged stiff with no money, nothing to eat, and no place to sleepmeets a starv- ing prostitute, he thinks, I can see that she is the same as me (Kromer 1986b, 78). As one woman tells a stiff in another stiff novel, Edward Andersons Hungry Men, a down-and-out man begs and a woman sells (1935, 131).4 Womens exchange of money for sex colors the exchange between the male stiff and his potential benefactor. In another scene oft repeated in Depression literature, a scene that can overlap with the can-you- spare-a-dime scene, the stiff asks for a place to sleep. The plea for a place to sleep reenacts the threatening though inviting atmosphere of potential sexuality in the plea for a dime. This time, instead of the met- aphor of money figuring sex, the place to sleepa bedfigures met- onymically as the setting of sex. And in still another variant on the scene of begging, a man who is not a stiff offers a stiff a place to eat and sleep, coding the invitation as a queer proposition, which turns the male stiff into a prostitute. The potential for such a scene between men, and the more frequent exchange between a man and a female prostitute, colors even supposedly asexual scenes of men begging from other men. How to Make a Queer 93 Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 A stiff, reduced to waiting for nothing, needs to make something out of nothing. Here the word make has many meanings. Tom describes prostitutes as women on the make (Kromer 1986b, 18). Each night, all over again, Tom needs to make a flop (20), meaning find a place to sleep, or needs to beg for money to pay for a place to sleep. When Tom combines forces with a would-be prostitute on the make (78) and they try to parlay her last four bits (fifty cents) into a few meals, he describes the two of them as on the make for a beef stew (79). Once, he remembers, he made the restaurants well enough to eat for a week on three cents (81). When he succeeds at hopping a dan- gerously fast train, he thinks, I made this drag (106). In chapter 4 of Waiting for Nothing, Tom sits on a park bench in the evening, implic- itly preparing to spend the night there, as he has spent so many nights on park benches before. Like many other parks, this one is crowded with hungry stiffs as desperate as Tom. But as the evening dark- ens, this park also attracts queer men who are not stiffs. For every queer, Tom thinks, there is a hundred stiffs to make him (46). What, then, does it mean to make a queer? Stiffs on the make, queer or not, had a charged relation to queer men on the make for stiffs. The Depression vastly increased the num- ber of stiffs, but the charged relation between stiffs and queers began before the Depression. George Chaunceys (1994) magisterial history of gay New York from 1890 to 1940 describes a widespread pattern, especially among the working class, of effeminate men known as fairies who sought or welcomed sex from conventionally masculine men, sometimes through prostitution, so that the men who paid for sex with fairies were known as trade. The trade understood them- selves as heterosexual. Sometimes the trade sought out fairies, and other times they were more or less indifferent about whether they had sex with women or with fairies, so long as their partners acted in ways conventionally understood as feminine (Chauncey 1994, esp. ch. 2 and 3). In 1928, not long before the stock market crashed, Iowan Raymond Kresensky published 50-Cent Flop, a poem about stiffs and queer men. It may call to mind Robert Frosts uncharacteristically urban Acquainted with the Night, which opens and closes with the sugges- tive line, I have been one acquainted with the night (Frost 1979, 255), similar to Kresenskys opening and closing line, I have walked 94 American Literature Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 the streets where men like shadows go (1928, 18). But Frosts poem came out in October 1928 (Frost 1979, 554), four months after Kresen- skys poem. Kresenskys first stanza places the stiff in a flophousea term for an inexpensive, typically rundown lodging house frequented by home- less men: I have walked the streets where men like shadows go Up rickety stairs to second story rooms. And I have gone too, hiding in gray piles Of musty rags that they call sheets, and watched The red lights blink and men in terrible dreams Toss themselves and cry like children in their sleep. (1928, 18) In 1928, before traffic lights, the red lights tell usfiguratively if not literally that the rundown flophouse, with its rickety stairs, lies in a red-light district. The shared neighborhood implies connections between the culture of the flophouse and the culture of sex work. After all, like the johns and the prostitutes, the stiffs walk the streets. All three groups, in their own ways, search for a bed. We might think, though, that unlike the johns and the prostitutes, the impoverished stiffs do not walk the streets at night in search of sex. But soon the poem begins to worry about the difficulty of keeping sex out of the flop- house. Because in the flophouse, says the stiff who speaks the poem, I have passed rooms where queers have beckoned me And then ashamed hid in the gray dim light. I have paid my fifty cents; nor found the rest That I had asked; nor touched the warmth of flesh. As the stiff tells of his shame for sleeping where queers beckon him, he hedges defensively by making it sound, at first, as if the queers feel the shame, leading this reader, at least, to need to reread the lines to sort out the ghostly difference between queers as other and stiff as self. It seems unlikely that queers would beckon him only to hide in shame a moment later, so the shame must be the speaking stiff s. He feels shame for attracting queer desire and implicitly for the possibility that the queer mens desire for him signals a displaced reflection of his own desire for the queer men. In his self-consciousness, he almost makes it sound as if the fifty cents he pays for his flop represents a payment for sex with other men How to Make a Queer 95 Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 in the flophouse. The low price may make that reading implausible but not impossible. After all, fifty cents is enough to buy a desperate man a rundown flop and so perhaps not too little for a queer stiff to charge, especially to charge a clientele whom the queer stiff can hardly expect to have more than that to pay. A 1936 sociological study of stiffs in Chicago shelters reports that the price they paid prosti- tutes ranged from twenty-five cents to $1.75 (Sutherland and Locke 1936, 130). Still, the beckoning queers may have other motives for sex besides getting paid. Since the poem presents the flophouse queers in the plural, they could at least as likely find sex in each others arms as in the arms of the next random stiff to join them in the flophouse. But they could want as much to tease and challenge a straight stiff s fear as to find or out another queer stiff. In these contexts, when the speaking stiff follows by saying that he did not touch the warmth of flesh, he exposes a dual desire: one, to lament his loneliness, and two, to reassure us, and his nervously self-conscious self, that he did not beckon back to the beckoning queers. But he cannot get away from the topsy-turvy confusion of catego- ries that makes him find the nearness of queer men so irresistible a fascination, as the next lines re-testify: There is an end tonight, but day is night / And night is day beside the sagging cot. As the speaker worries that he can no longer tell day from night, he then goes on to protect himself from needing to differentiate queer men from straight men by referring to the other stif fs in the flophouse, straight or queer, in an undifferentiated plural. There is one exception, when soon after the puzzled conflation of day with night, he describes the thin-skinned boy, pretty and called a she, / Whose bed was made by men with blood afire. When menand here I use the word men deliberatelymake the fairy, or his bed, with their blood afire, and the stiff who speaks the poem describes the fairy with the feminine, or effeminate, adjective pretty, he steps, however slightly, across the ghostly boundary he has labored to tell us he has not crossed. And yet his opposition between men and the boy called a she sustains a place, in the world described by Chauncey (1994), for conventionally masculine men who have sex with effeminate men, with fairies, to continue to see themselves as heterosexual. But as Chauncey also describes, by the 1920s and 1930s that world was giving way to a more insistent binary opposition between queer and heterosexual desires and identities. Each of the works I discuss here offers a snap- shot of that contested transition in process. They each dramatize the 96 American Literature Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 vulnerability of stiffsand of queer men, stiffs or notamid precari- ous sexual and gender boundaries. Those boundaries rested on the capacity for paid labor to establish a conventional masculinity that then came under increasing threat when the Great Depression threw millions of men, like the representative man in Brother, Can You Spare a Dime?, into the unchosen plight of the stiff. Queer Attractions and Straight Fears: A Constellation of Examples The few critics who even mention Waiting for Nothing sometimes group it with any of five other moderately better-known novels about the most down-and-out transients published and set during or just before the Depression: Edward Dahlbergs Bottom Dogs from 1929, Jack Conroys 1933 The Disinherited, Edward Newhouses 1934 You Cant Sleep Here, Edward Andersons 1935 Hungry Men, and Nelson Algrens 1935 Somebody in Boots. Much as the characters in these nov- els, like Tom in Waiting for Nothing, suffer and struggle, begging for spare change and food and searching for a place to sleep, they fare far better at each of those tasks than Tom fares.5 And four of these five novelsall but You Cant Sleep Herehave more or less sexual encounters, briefer and more circumspect thanWaiting for Nothings, between queer men and ostensibly straight stiffs. When Lorry Lewis, the hobo protagonist of Dahlbergs Bottom Dogs, arrives in San Francisco, we get a long list of the sights he sees, beginning with a parade of sailors on Market street (1929, 204). (Throughout, I quote Dahlbergs idiosyncratic writing as in the origi- nal.) Then, Standing in front of the sailors and army mens hotel which overlooked the shipping docks, he walked a half block up and down to keep warm; waiting for a tar or khakishirt to come out, he felt like a rundown whore who did her soliciting on dark streets. He heads to a boozingjoint and dancehall, where he finds everything wide open. He pushes through swingingdoors and sees sailors strutting close up to their partners; one couldnt dodge them. The niggerjazz band was at their pop. Uneasy, he steps outside but finds it cold at the corner, he couldnt bunk there, it looked too cheap and down-and-out to hope to panhandle a few coppers for a bed. So he swung thru the door again and . . . stood looking at one customer. . . . Finally, he halfnudged him, speaking low . . . Mister, Im flat, could you help me out. The customer, a Swede, buys him food and drink. How to Make a Queer 97 Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 After that they went out together, the swedes arm about him, Lorry uncomfortable, and wanting to ditch him at the streetcorner. The Swede said hed put him up for the nite; he had a clean room and a bed big enuf for two. Once they reach the room, Lorry wishes he had beat it, but . . . turned out the lite and undressed. He gets as near the edge of the bed as possible, heaping up stealthily in a sort of mound between them the bedspread so that he could get off by him- self. But in an echo of Ishmael and Queequeg from Moby-Dick, the dockhand kept backing up against him, as tho to get warm. Lorry really wanted to get out, but he finds the bed too comfortable to leave. Suddenly, he started up, the feel of something against him, his body in a sluice of sweat; the dockhand was whining after him, as he jumped into a pair of pants and ran out the door like a streak, only to realize that he has put on the Swedes pants instead of his own. For a moment he thought of going back; but he couldnt put himself in for that (2058). In the context of the cruisey language about sailors, including sail- ors and soldiers Lorry apparently tries to pick up to share their room for the night, Lorry hesitates before pushing back and forth through the swinging doors to a sexual, racial, and musical borderland, where each anticonventional interest jacks up and metonymically figures the other. There, he thinks that he cannot dodge sailors, which tips us off that he wants to dodge them and, finally, at the same time, does not want to dodge them. Nor, since he feels like a . . . whore, can he resist more or less soliciting the dockhand (and hinting at cockhand and dickhand). He stares down the dockhand and then, extending his mixture of desire and hesitation, comes on to him in a coded and hence deniable pickup line, deniable perhaps to himself as well as potentially to readers. After all, Lorry can tell himself, he is just asking for a place to sleep that night. But Lorry can fool himself only so far. He at least half if not wholly knows what he is getting into when he goes off to share the Swedes bed. He may not entirely like all that he seeks and finds there, but he likes fearing what he fears and having it to fear and to refuse. Between Lorry and the dockhand, we can hardly tell who comes out to and solicits whom, until, when Lorry loses his pants and gains the other mans pants in their place, he figuratively exchanges sexualities and becomes what he also runs from. Part of him, therefore, wants the dockhand sexually, while at the same time part of him wants to beat it and get off by himself. The point here 98 American Literature Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 is not the readability of the dockhands same-sex desire so much as the partly defensive and partly exploratory unreadability of Lorrys desire, both to himself and to readers. In this 1929 novel, less lies at stake in such a scene than will lie at stake in similar scenes in later works from the middle of the Depres- sion. In Bottom Dogs, there is no Depression to throw Lorry out of work. Instead, he quits his job so that he can boe and tramp in search of freedom and adventure, and his boeing takes up less than half the novel. He is more akin to the traveling tramps of hobo auto- biographies like Jim Tullys once-celebrated but now mostly forgotten Beggars of Life (1924) than to the novels of Depression stiffs.6 Tully, like Lorry, travels through some of the same scenes that populate the poetics of the stiff but with a sense of romance or hard luck rather than a sense of desperation. The pre-Depression hobo traveled by choice, versus the Depression stiff, whose desperate travels represent the unchosen catastrophe of an entire generation. In the 1925 essay The Mind of the Hobo, leading sociologist Rob- ert E. Park, drawing on Nels Andersons study The Hobo (1923), saw the hobo as a romantically willful creature of wanderlust, enjoying his artistic temperament (Park 1925, 160) at the cost of an irrespon- sible individualism. Park saw hobo life as a choice emerging from a particular temperament, not as something imposed on transients by social conditions that constrained choice. While Parks essay includes valuable insights, the Depression that hit a few years later made it harder to sustain the idea that desperate unemployed transients chose their misery. The portrayal of stiffs in Waiting for Nothing and other Depression writings, whatever else it does, offers in effect an argument that the life of the Depression stiff was imposed on stiffs, not chosen by them. Like the pre-Depression hobos described by Anderson and Park, Dahlbergs Lorry has little difficulty finding jobs as he travels. Even as a hoboing bum, Lorry like Tullymeets kind responses on a scale far beyond anything the more beleaguered Tom finds inWaiting for Nothing. Lorrys hobo vulnerability, such as it is, represents the vulnerability of ostensibly straight hobos as a class and not, like the desperate stiffs in the works I will discuss from the Depression, the vul- nerability of a fallen everyman cast to represent, at the least, all osten- sibly straight men across class. How to Make a Queer 99 Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 In The Disinherited, Hungry Men, and Somebody in Boots, the osten- sibly straight stiffs reject overtures from queer men, most circum- spectly and briefly in Hungry Men. Newly arrived after midnight in another in a series of cities, Acel Stecker, Andersons stiff in Hungry Men, walks the streets looking for the city flophouse. Suddenly, he sees a youth pushing himself erect from the lamppost. You got a match? the youth asks. Acel gives him a pack of cigarettes and asks if he knows where the flophouse is. The cigarette clung to the moist lips of the other and bobbed as he spoke. You want to go with me? Acel responds, Go to hell, and there the scene ends (1935, 173). The youth could merely be offering to lead Acel to the flophouse. But Acels harsh response tips us off that, rightly or wrongly, Acel reads the offer as a queer proposition, and he takes the proposition as threatening. In that light, the potentially neutral term youth emerges, at least in Acels focalizing mind, as code. The pushing erectness, the eagerly moist lips, the lamppost, and the cigarette and its suggestive bobbingagain in Acels mind or in the reading of Acels mind that the book forwardsemerge as phallically suggestive signifiers of queer male desire, and the coding itself comes off as part of the flirt- ing and the come-on. As in Bottom Dogs, the information we get and the focalized way the narrative offers it give us less to interpret the interpreted, desiring queer and more to interpret the focalizing inter- preter, the fearful but intrigued, ostensibly straight stiff. After all, You got a match? can simply ask for a match, but it is also a classic pickup line. The mooching for a match and Acels gift of the cigarettes evoke an erotically, phallically charged exchange, as in the famous scene between Lauren Bacall and Humphrey Bogart in the 1944 film version of Ernest Hemingways To Have and Have Not. As Lorry swaps pants with the other man, swaps erotically charged metonymies of their desire, so here in Hungry Men Acel takes what goes in his own hungry mans mouth and offers it as a gift for the mouth of the sexually hungry other man. By giving the other man his cigarettes he acknowledges the otherness of the mana man here actually called the otherand at the same time he signals his own potential to participate in that otherness. He signals his potential queer- ness, that is, until, like Lorrys queerness, it looms so closely and rec- ognizably that his fear of it drives him to expel it from his definition of himself. And so Acel speaks the repudiationGo to hell that reas- sures him of his separateness from what he now recognizes in the other and, incipiently, in himself. 100 American Literature Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 In The Disinherited, The bums in the park stretched out on the benches and spread newspapers over their faces to keep out the sun and flies. . . . Powdered, perfumed and rouged men strolled among the benches and occasionally accosted a bum, offering to take him on a party or buy a bottle. They addressed one another as Agnes, Gertrude, or some other feminine name. Often the bums chased the per- verts in real or simulated anger, threatening to murder them, less frequently their blandishments were successful. (Conroy 1991, 18788) Conroys brief description ends with a sentence that points in compet- ing directions. It paints the bums as angry or as playful, as defend- ing against same-sex desire by trying to expel it, like Acel, or, finally, as embracing it. The harsh language of perverts seems free from any effort to recuperate the slur through playful irony. Instead, the harsh term exposes a fearful desire to separate the narration from the queer men it describes. Eventually, though, that fear gives up its control when the paragraph concludes, however briefly, in more receptive tones. The receptive tones defend against the harshness of threaten- ing murder. By dangling from a comma splice (between them and less) that winds the harshness of perverts and murder into their more receptive opposite at the end of the run-on sentence, the para- graphs concluding nod to accepting the queer men suspends the zeal to expel queerness in an uncategorizable awareness of its own limits. In Somebody in Boots, Cass McKay watches the unclaimed children of Chicagos tenement-town begging and selling and hears a not nec- essarily ostensibly straight young boy try to make a queer man, offering himself to a pervert in front of a cheap hotel (Algren 1987, 171). Cass, by contrast, grows used to sleeping on park benches. One night in a Chicago park a man stares at him paternally. When he spoke Cass saw a warm small mouth; it was rouged and moved roundly; its lips were sweet berries. The man sits beside Cass and plies him with questions: You want a job tonight, sonny? Ill give you a nice job. Easy. Soft. You know? Soft as sugar-titty. You like sugar-titty, sonny? Then he laughed like a girl and gave Cass a long cigarette and moved uneasily nearer, till Cass smelled perfume on the [mans] How to Make a Queer 101 Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 coat and could see white spittle on the little red lips. Cass thought of boys who became slaves to men, and he wanted to run from this man. Yet he dared to make no move, fear wrapped him round. . . . About him the lake-fog came creeping alive; the man put one hand about him possessively and with his other hand stroked Casss thigh. And as he stroked he spoke slowly, in rhythm with his hand. Come on, kiddo, you got me now. Youll love it, honest you will. Its fun for you too, and well have a drink first, and well take a long ride. (8182) He waves a $20 bill, a bigger bill than Cass has ever seen. Cass stares at it for a long time, and finally the man loses patience and abruptly walks off, his pearl spats atwinkle in the arc light (82). Again we see the exchange of a cigarette, this time in the other direction, from the queer man trying to make the ostensibly straight man. Again, as well, in this more lurid scene, we see the eroticized mouth and lips, clichs that go with the clich false paternalism of the older, twinkling man who tries to make the vulnerable younger man (sonny). The queer man offers sex work as a job with good pay but also, trying every blandishment he can think of, as pleasure: Youll love it, he says. Its fun for you. Meanwhile, the spittle on the mans lips and the creeping fog off Lake Michigan make unsubtle figures of the creepi- ness that Cass feels in the twinkling queer, and yet Cass does not repudiate the soliciting queer as Acel repudiates the youth by the lamppost. The overabundance of incentivesmoney, ease, softness, sugar, fun, drink, a long ridemakes it impossible to tell which attractions in the offer make Cass hesitate, impossible not only for readers to know but also for Cass to know about himself. When the queer man gives up and leaves, his departure suspends Cass in possi- bilities that remain unclaimed but undenied. Such an interpretation of Cass or of the other ostensibly straight characters is not about outing fictional characters. It is not about deciding that Cass, for example, is really gay. Nothing here excludes the heterosexual desire we see elsewhere in Cass. But his being and desire are not reducible to his heterosexuality. Again, the ostensibly straight man has confidence that he can read the queer man as queer, but he has less confidence in his own reading of himself. The queer mans abrupt departure, before Cass can rouse himself to respond to the mans invitation with a yes or a no, suspends Cass in queer possibility outside any knowable binary opposition between straight and gay. 102 American Literature Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 Such moments thread their way through these works without turn- ing into a dominant trend. In Somebody in Boots as in The Disinherited, the dismissive resort to the word pervert, in this case when the young boy offers himself to a pervert in front of a cheap hotel, defends against the memory of Casss suspended encounter with the man in the park. Three times we see Cass nervously remembering that encounter. The voices he hears as he bums across the country all came to sound alike to him, as voices sound in rain. Their words were encrusted with a thin film of white spittle, like the spittle on the lips of the pervert in the park (103). He worries that any of the voices he hears could come from someone whose desires repeat the desires of the man in the park. In short, the man in the park could represent any man, even Cass. Soon, when he steals money and worries over his crime, strangely now Cass remembered a bill that a man in a park once had shown him; he thought that every one he took now was a twenty (176). When Cass goes to prison, he watches in horror as Nubby, a tyrannical cellmate, rules over their cellblock by bullying, brutalizing, and raping teenage prisoners. Nubby dubs his prime tar- get Creepy: We all call him Creepy on account hes my punk (132). When Cass sees Nubby go into Creepys cell, Cass sweated in ter- ror, remembering the man in the park in Chicago, fearing Nubby as he had feared that man (134), the man who solicited him amid the creeping fog. In the story of Nubby and his prison brutality, Somebody in Boots exposes a pattern of brutal abuse, but by conflating the queer man in the park with the queer and brutal Nubby, it reads queer cruising and queer desire as abusive. Algrens story of Nubby and Creepy is there- fore not the queer modernist cruising that Michael Trask (2003) describes as a cross-class validation and merging of class instability and queer sexual instability. But it nevertheless evokes a straight fear of the potential that Trask describes for sexual instability,7 both within the beleaguered class of Algrens characters and between his characters and the literacy and likely relative prosperity of his novels readers. Onward Christian Soldiers, a 1934 story by Albert Maltz in New Masses, offers something more like cross-class cruising. In Maltzs story, which takes its ironic title from a Salvation Army band playing in the background, a prosperous queer man succeeds in picking up a starving stiff, in contrast to the beckoning queers in Kresenskys How to Make a Queer 103 Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 poem or most of the queer men propositioning stiffs in The Disinher- ited, Hungry Men, and Somebody in Boots. Sixteen years later, Maltz went to prison as one of the Hollywood Ten, writers and filmmakers banished from Hollywood for not cooperating with the House Com- mittee on Un-American Activities investigation into Communist sym- pathizers in the film industry. In this story from the Depression, which so far as I have seen is not mentioned in any of the criticism about Maltzs writing,8 Maltzs narrator describes the queer man with revulsion, calling him the fat man in a way that makes his fat body imply a culpable prosperity, in contrast to the starving stiff. Thus instead of the appreciation for cross-class cruising that Trask (2003, 10841) finds in, for example, Hart Cranes impersonal engagements with hobos in The Bridge (1930), Maltzs story assumes a voice of working-class revulsion at queer, middle-class sexual appropriation of working-class, male, and precariously heterosexual vulnerability. The fat man walks the reluctant, crying stiff, a nice-looking boy (Maltz 1934, 23), back to the fat mans apartment, promising stuff to drink, nice clothes, and all he can eat, implicitly in payment for sex (24). Signs loom across the story that the fat man offers his charity only as a way of making the stiff. For example, he gives no context for his charity, and he offers the stiff a bath (a coded invitation to take off his clothes in the fat mans apartment). In cynical rather than appre- ciatively campy tones, we also get such clich tipoffs of queerness (which signify collectively more than they do individually) as the fat mans fancy gold-headed cane, silver cigarette case, and freshly shaved face in the evening. Then we see the disgust of the narrator and his friend Ed, and even the fat mans scorn for the only woman in the story, who is indeed presented as vile. She yells at the fat man, I know what the hell youre after. Then she pats her breasts and leers and laughs at him, taunting him for his lack of sexual interest in women (23). At the end of the story, when the fat man and the starving stiff walk off together, the narrator tells us, I looked at Ed and he looked back at me. I felt like hell. I felt like running out on the streets and commit- ting a murder (24). In his revulsion at the queer exchange that he has secretly listened to and watched like an obsessed voyeur, the nar- rator wants to separate himself from queerness by bashing, even mur- dering, the cruising gay man, a defensive reaction that ends up expos- ing the fascination with queerness that it tries to deny. He retreats to 104 American Literature Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 the safety of a supposedly asexual stare into the eyes of his buddy Ed, trying to reassure himself that his own same-sex intimacy has no sex in it. He wants to believe that his friendship with Ed offers a bulwark and proof against complicity in sexuality between men. In a screeching case of mixed signals, New Masses published a poem by the lesbian poet Elsa Gidlow immediately beneath Maltzs queer- fearing story. Perhaps an editor, resenting the homophobia in Maltzs story, tried to sabotage it by publishing Gidlow. (Or perhaps an editor tried to sabotage Gidlow by putting her poem next to Maltzs homopho- bic story.) Gidlows On a Grey Thread from 1923 may well have been, according to Kenneth Rexroth (1978), the first book published for general circulation in the United States which contained love poems of woman to women, but this poem, titled Breadline (Gidlow 1934), is an eloquent plea for readers to recognize the humanity of starving stiffs, hungry men whose eyes will haunt whoever sees them. For one reader, nevertheless, the lack of a happily straight ending meant that the queer phobia in Maltzs story was not queer-phobic enough. New Masses published an outraged letter to the editor by one Barney Conal (1934), who protested not that Maltzs story portrayed a gay man making a straight man, but instead that the narrator and Ed do not rescue the starving stiff from the rich pervert, since the stiff is obviously unwilling to take to the fat pederast. Of more relevance, perhaps, Conal insists on the plausibility of such a rescue because, he says, it is what even any two young street-corner bums will do, if theres a scrap of decency left in them, and he has seen it done, even by half-drunks (24). In short, Conal, despite his disturbing letter, testifies to the frequency of two scenes: the scene of queer men and ostensibly straight stiffs makingpicking upeach other, and as in Bottom Dogs, The Disinherited, Hungry Men, and Somebody in Boots, the reactionary scene of other straight men recoiling from the pickup scene in horror. Precarious Masculinity and Wanting It Both Ways All these possibilities come together dramatically in chapter 4 ofWait- ing for Nothing, at least in the US edition. For the English edition, after printing the book the publisher, Constable, went to the extraordi- nary length of slicing out chapter 4 and replacing it with a noteon blue paperexplaining that the publisher suppressed it for fear of How to Make a Queer 105 Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 prosecution. But the note never said what the chapter portrayed that might lead to prosecution. It left readers to suppose that it must be something by definition unspeakable, perhaps the Love that dare not speak its name, to use the famous phrase from the poem by Lord Alfred Douglas (1896) that was widely understood as a euphemism for gay love. We have cut out Chapter IV entirelycut it out with reluctance and with shame. Constable feared it might be guilty of corrupting youth if it left it in, and that is why Waiting for Nothing appears in England in an emasculated form (Constable and Co. 1986, 274). In effect, Constable confessed that it felt compelled, by some will it claimed was not entirely its own, to castrate the novel. In the dangerous chapter, Tom sits on a park bench and thinks, as we have seen, For every queer there is a hundred stiffs to make him (Kromer 1986b, 46). What then, again, does it mean to make a queer? Partly, it has to do with arithmetic. The hundred-to-one ratio of stiffs in the park to queers in the park suggests competition, which implies that making a queer represents a much-desired goal and a considerable accomplishment. The concept of making a queer suggests agency in the maker, as if the queer were not a queer until someone makes him so. But it also suggests the opposite, namely, that someone is selected to be made, to be propositioned, picked up, or seduced, in part because he is already queer. In yet another permutation, it can suggest that the nonqueer who makes the queer actively invites the queer to proposition, pick up, or seduce the maker, which shifts some of the agency to the queer. In that case, the maker is also made and, hence, also made queer. What goes around comes around. The reversibility makes the arithmetic tricky. Every other guy, Tom says, is a queer. The other guy is trying to make her (47). Every other guy could mean all the other guys. Or it could mean every sec- ond guy and thus 50 percent of the guys. But if we follow, or try to fol- low, the middle-class convention, now wobbling but still familiar, that guys come in two and only two flavors, queer or straight, and if half the guys are queer and the other half are trying to make the queer half, then that makes the other guys queer too, since they actively seek sex with a man. In other words, if we draw a binary opposition between queer and straight, then the straight half, at least as Tom describes it, is trying to make the queer half, but trying to make the queer half makes the straight half queer too. Fifty percent plus 50 per- cent equals 100 percent, leaving no one left to be straight.9 And yet 106 American Literature Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 if we follow the older convention that Chauncey (1994) describes, the working-class way that allows for stereotypically masculine men who identify as heterosexual to retain that identification even as they have sex with fairies, then a straight 50 percent can try to make a queer 50 percent without compromising their identity as straight. Toms pecu- liar formula, thereforeevery other guy is a queer, and the other guy is trying to make heroffers a playfully arithmetical rhetorical figure that captures the pleasure, from one side, and the threat, from another side, of a cultural moment and space where the threat and the pleasure, the queer and the straight, merge and exchange places. Which takes us to the queer exchange when a guy approaches Tom in the park: He twists and wiggles with mincing steps. His eyelashes are mas- carad, and his cheeks are rouged. His lips are flaming red with lip- stick. He sits down on this bench beside me. He is perfumed plenty, and he smells pretty good. Oho, I think, this guy is queer, and he doesnt care who knows it. (Kromer 1986b, 43) Again, the queer man approaching the ostensibly straight man opens with the familiar pickup line. Got a match, deary? (43), he asks, with deary transforming the hard-boiled opener into something campier. Again, as in Maltzs story, he takes out a cigarette case, this time gold instead of silver. And again, he offers the stiffToma bath at his apartment, adding that his bath has mauve tile. . . . His eyes spar- kle when he mentions the bath. He licks his lips. He tests Tom out:  Sometimes two fellows can have a pretty good time together, he says. Did you ever go out with any fellows? (45). He checks a mirror to straighten his lipstick and then says, Gracious me, . . . I am a total wreck. When they part, after he gives Tom four bits for dinner and they set up a date for later that evening, this man whom Tom refers to as a queer, a fairy, and a pansy says, Toodle-doo until tonight (46). In short, from the get-go, Tom knows that he is trade, knows that he is negotiating with a queer man to trade sex for food, a bed, and clothes. Still more, he (and the novelist who shares his name) wants his readers to know that he knows. As Rexroth (1968) put it in a review ofWaiting for Nothing, Tom is playing the queers. For Rexroth play- ing ostensibly means taking advantage of, exploiting, the queers, playing queer men for food and shelter. But it also blurs into meaning How to Make a Queer 107 Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 playacting: pretending to be queer. And pretending to be queer, in turn, can suggest a self-deception, a mask of acting queer and telling yourself that you are straight to cover over being queer and pretend- ing not to be queer. Whichever way or ways we read it, Rexroth takes playingor making the queers as a familiar scene in the life of the Depression down-and-out. When Tom heads to a hash house to spend his four bits on a beef stew, another stiff asks him a question: Did you make her? this skinny stiff next to me at the counter says. Make who? I say. Mrs. Carter, he says. I see you talkin to her in the park. So her name is Mrs. Carter? I say. Sure, I made her for four bits. I got a date for tonight. (Kromer 1986b, 46) Here again, as in Maltzs story, an unseen bystander watches the queer-straight transaction, spotlighting it as a spectacle of intense interest. But this time the watcher speaks up and models a more approv- ing response. You are a lucky stiff making Mrs. Carter, he says. There are plenty of stiffs in this town would give their eye teeth to make Mrs. Carter (46). By recognizing what he saw and by providing a conventionally feminine name for the gay man, the skinny stiff also defines what he watched as a variation on making a queer. He sees the exchange between a fairy and a conventionally masculine stiff not as an exception, but as routine and even enviable. Tom recognizes the routine, the ritualized game (43, 45) of play- ing or making a queer man, but he also fears it. These pansies give me the willies, he thinks, but I have got to get myself a feed (44). When they walk off to Mrs. Carters apartment, he thinks, It is mis- ery for me to walk on the street with this queer (48). Once they reach Mrs. Carters bedroom and she touches his neck, he pulls away. I am ashamed of all this. I am sick in the stomach, I am so ashamed of all this. What can I do? What I am doing is all I can do. A stiff has got to live (51). He feels caught between the changing models that Chauncey (1994) describes. On the one hand, as a veteran stiff, he recognizes the working-class model that routinizes sex between con- ventionally masculine men who identify as heterosexual and con- ventionally feminine men known as fairies. Following that model, he chooses to go with Mrs. Carter. On the other hand, Tom, who several 108 American Literature Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 times in other chapters remembers with perplexity his middle-class upbringing and education, also seems to believe that his identity as a heterosexual rules out or at least makes revolting the prospect of sex with Mrs. Carter. Indeed, their rendezvous partly follows and partly expands Chaunceys model, since neither of them is working class. Mrs. Carter sharpens Toms perplexity by trying to establish him as heterosexual even as she tries to draw him to her bed. Did you ever have a girl? Mrs. Carter asks him (44). Tom explains, You have to have dough to get a girl. . . . If you havent got any dough, you havent got any girl (44). Through dialogue like this, their negotiation sla- loms through a series of double entendres. In one sense, Mrs. Carter wants Tom to have had a girl, because she desires him as trade, as a heterosexual man who desires women, and can therefore desire her as a woman. Thus when she says, A good-looking fellow like you ought to get a girl without any money, she immediately follows by flirtatiously pinching his leg, telling him, in effect, that she is one girl who, unlike most of the other girls, he can get without money (44). In another sense, she does not want him to have or to have had a girl, because she wants him to desire her as a him or as a him who is a her. And in still another sense, all these meanings merge simultaneously despite their supposed contradictions. Implicitly, the contradictions boost the attraction, at least for Mrs. Carter. And so when she asks him, Did you ever go out with any fellows? he responds, I never did, and then he thinks, I am lying, but if this queer wants a virgin, thats what he gets (45). Toms thoughts imply that he has sold himself to fellows to fairiesbefore. And in the context of the willies he gets from the possibility of selling himself again, his thoughts also tell us that he continues to see himself as a heterosexual who would not ordinarily have sex with men. In that sense, the straight men who have sex with queer men in these works engage, or at least like to think that they engage, in so-called situa- tional homosexuality. In situational homosexuality (a subset of so-called acquired homo- sexuality), people who see themselves as straight and find themselves in a same-sex world, such as a prison, a same-sex school, a ship at sea, or arguably the mostly male world of stiffs on the down and out dur- ing the Depression, may have sex with someone of their own sex as a way of adapting to unusual limits without changing their supposedly true heterosexual identities.10 As George Orwell explains in Down How to Make a Queer 109 Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 and Out in Paris and London (1933), after another desperate man on the down and out began making homosexual attempts upon mea nasty experience in a locked, pitch-dark cell, the man had been so long away from women that he turned to homosexuality not out of identity but instead out of desperation. Homosexuality, the man explained to Orwell, is general among tramps of long standing (199). Such a man, after he takes to the road . . . is absolutely with- out hope of getting a wife, a mistress, or any kind of woman except very rarely . . .a prostitute, and therefore, Orwell concludes, the results of this must be: homosexuality (276). By calling on the con- cept of situational homosexuality, we risk too easily propping up a trembling binary opposition between overly separate concepts of straight and queer. We risk denying the overlap or blending of sexual- ities that depend on each other even when, and perhaps especially when, they see themselves as separate. On the other hand, to go beyond Chaunceys (1994) model by describing the ostensibly straight stiffs who have sex with other men as engaging in situational homosexuality can help bring out how these stories and poems do far more to portray straight anxieties than to portray queer life or queer characters. They differ, for example, from Hart Cranes poems, as we have seen, and from Charles Henri Ford and Parker Tylers 1933 novel The Young and the Evil, where a wide array of queer characters delight in their queerness, often through stream-of-consciousness and free indirect discourse that takes read- ers inside queer characters thinking. The stories about stiffs, by contrast, compress their queer charac- ters into a string of clichs seen from the outside. We never get the fat mans worries or anxieties in Maltzs story, and we never get the wor- ries or anxieties of the dockman who takes the straight stiff to his bed in Bottom Dogs, the worries and anxieties of the youth with the ciga- rette in Hungry Men, or of the queer men in the parks in The Disinher- ited and Somebody in Boots, though in prison Creepys suffering face smolders with anguish. Kromers novel goes a good distance farther, if still not all that far, in humanizing its queer characters, instead of reducing them to mere objects of opposition for its straight characters. But apart from Mrs. Carters and her roommate Glorias sometimes witty and sometimes worried dialogue, interiority in these works remains the psychic space of heterosexuals. For those reasons, these works are not queer literature in the usual sense of by and about so much as 110 American Literature Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 they act out straight anxieties about queerness and the fragile bound- aries of straightness, especially by dramatizing how the Great Depres- sion exposes and intensifies straight and masculine vulnerability. The straight men sensationalize same-sex desire as a threat, a curi- osity, and an attraction or object of voyeuristic interest. Their confi- dence in the hyper-readability of the queer men as definitively queer evokes the straight mens desire to see the queer men as mirroring the straight mens own sexuality, which they try to see as just as assured and readable as they imagine the queer mens sexuality.11 But that desire to reduce their own sexuality to its straightness indexes their failure to achieve the confidence they crave. The straight characters confidence in their knowledge, in their ability to read and understand queerness and queer men, evokes a power they cannot sustain. And when their power slips off the rails, it takes with it their pretense of knowledge. To the extent that they begin to sense that they do not know who the queer men are, they realize that they do not know who they are themselves. As Toms thoughts tell us that he continues to see himself as a het- erosexual who under ordinary circumstances would not have sex with men, he straddles both sides of the cultural change that Chaun- cey (1994) describes. He can be a heterosexual, with no interest in sex with men. At the same time, he can be heterosexual trade, a straight guy who has sex with queer guys, if only situationally, through his desperation as a starving stiff who sees no other path to a meal and a bed. Similarly, Mrs. Carter wants Tom to say he likes girls, not fellows. That would make him heterosexual, someone who would not sleep with her, because she is a man. But in another sense, she wants him to sleep with her as a heterosexual sleeping with a woman, or with a fairy, an effeminate she. (Readers in our own time may see her as transgender, an ahistorical or presentist approach. Here I will hold, more historically, to calling her a fairy.) And in yet another sense, sleeping with hersince she is a man takes away Toms mask of heterosexuality and makes him queer like her. Thus when Tom gets the lowdown on Mrs. Carters roommate Gloria by asking the skinny stiff, He queer, too? the skinny stiff responds by switching pronouns: Sure, shes queer (Kromer 1986b, 47). For a while, at least, Tom mostly gets the message. He begins referring to Mrs. Carter as she, though not consistently. He can still How to Make a Queer 111 Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 refer to her as this guy who is in the big dough, all right, and refer to Gloria as he. But after he describes Gloria as sprawled on a sky- blue lounge, . . . decked out in a pink negligee . . . edged in gold, crossing her shaved legs and wearing, on one ankle, a silver bracelet with a pink cameo as big as an egg (4849), Tom shifts to she for both Gloria and Mrs. Carter. Tom is the only character who appears in more than one chapter, so that we never see or even hear about Mrs. Carter in any other chap- ter. But the different chapters often parallel each other. Earlier in the novel, in a scene that slipped past the English censors, Tom had already run into a queer man who describes himself as a girl, antici- pating Mrs. Carter. The bulls (the police) arrest Tom for vagrancy. As he waits in jail for his trial, this guy in the next cell yells out, Like your suite, deary? Tom has no trouble reading this guys sexuality: He has a squeaky voice. I can see that his eyebrows are plucked. . . . This guy is as queer as they make them. The girlie guy complains that the police broke up my date. A girl cant even have a decent date without the goddam cops breaking in. With a voice of experience, Tom describesand explainswhat he then sees when another guy lying on the bunk gets up and shoves this queer away from the bars. He is a wolf. He does not want this pansy to be talking to me. He is jealous. For Christ sake, Florence, sit down sos I can get me some sleep, he says. (26) Much like Dr. Louis Berg in Revelations of a Prison Doctor (1934b), a landmark description of wolves and punks in a New York City prison, published the year beforeWaiting for Nothing, Kromer and his narra- tor use the slang of hobo and prison male-to-male sexual relations and assume that the slang needs explaining for their audience. Berg not only published his landmark expos, he also fictionalized it in two novels, Prison Doctor (1932) and especially Prison Nurse (1934a). Both novels draw on the same language and many of the same examples as Revelations of a Prison Doctor. Kromers portrait matches the world and somebut not allof the lingo reported (and lamented) by Berg.12 In language that continues to our own day, Berg describes punk as a term for young men, straight or queer, drawn into male-to- male prison couples by predatory, older, tougher, and more expe- rienced men called wolves. The wolves follow more conventionally 112 American Literature Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 masculine roles, while the punks follow more conventionally feminine roles, although Berg also notes that many wolves are former punks. We have already seen how Nubby, the prison wolf in Algrens Some- body in Boots, explains that they call the boy he abuses Creepy on account hes my punk (1987, 132). Across this jail scene the description of the feminine Florence and her tough-guy wolf shows Kromers narrator recognizing the same two categories of queer men that Berg describes (and that are now perhaps more familiar to a wider audience than they were when Berg and Kromer published their books), namely, queer men who see themselves as feminine (pansies, in Toms term) and queer men who see themselves as masculine (wolves). When he describes the wolf s jealous fear that Florence pays Tom too much attention, he signals that others might read Tom as a possible wolf, or perhaps as trade. All these recognitions should help him place Mrs. Carter. Still, though, when Mrs. Carter gets Tom in her bedroom and begins to touch him and he pulls away, and she asks defensively, Dont you think Im pretty?, he says, Sure, youre pretty. . . . Youre a good-looking guy, all right. In response, she frowns and says, I am not a guy, and so Tom tries to adjust. Well, I say, youre a good- lookingyoure a good-looking girl (Kromer 1986b, 51), but he can- not get out the word girl without hesitating first, as marked in print by the interrupting dash and the repetition of youre a good-looking. Tom knows the categories and the possibilities, but he cannot quite settle on a way to make the merry-go-round of gender hold still. Even Mrs. Carter makes a gesture at trying to stabilize their relations, or stabilize the possibility of comfort with instability, by asking a sec- ond time, Did you ever have a girl? And when Tom repeatseven describing his words as a repetition that he used to have a girl. But I havent any girl now. . . . No dough, no girl, Mrs. Carter says, I dont want you to have a girl, and then adds, I want you to stay here (52). But staying there, with her, means both having a girl and not hav- ing a girl at the same time. When Tom finally pulls off his clothes and crawls into bed with Mrs. Carter, they make each other both heterosex- ual and queer, except to the extent that when they are both heterosexual and queer, then their queerness, by its capaciousness of definition, ends up outpacing their heterosexuality. Indeed, as determinedly as Tom denies he is queer and insists he is straight, his arithmetical formula corners him in Mrs. Carters How to Make a Queer 113 Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 bedroom. If every second guy is trying to make a queer, then whether he succeeds at making a queer or nothis efforts bounce back to make a queer of himself. Tom wants it both ways, repeatedly denying queerness and repeatedly unable to keep himself from claim- ing it. As he walks with Mrs. Carter to her apartment and thinks, It is misery for me to walk on the street with this queer, he worries about the people who see them together. He hears them laugh and tries not to pay any attention. . . . Maybe they will think I am queer, too. Id like to see some bastard accuse me of being queer. The first guy that calls me a pansy, it will be just too bad for that guy. That guy will never call anyone else a pansy. Even as he imagines corroborating his conventional masculinity by punishing some guy for calling him a pansy, his sarcastic crack that hed like to see some bastard accuse him of being queer doubles back on him to speak opposite desires at once: he would despise being called queer, and he would like being called queer. Here we can draw on Eve Kosofsky Sedgwicks (1998) concept of minoritizing models of queerness, which see queer people as a small subset of the larger population, versus universalizing models of queer- ness, which see queerness as something in everyone, whether recog- nized or not. Through his thoughts about what he fears and what he would like, Tom makes queerness other, in a minoritizing model of queerness. At the same time, he universalizes it by denying his own queerness in a form that also asserts it. In making a queer, then, Tom makes himself queer in varying ways and degrees like the speaker in 50-Cent Flop, Lorry in Bottom Dogs, the bums in The Disinher- ited, Acel in Hungry Men, Cass in Somebody in Boots, and the starving stiff in Onward Christian Soldiers, as well, perhaps, as the two bud- dies who watch him. Perhaps the repetition across so many instances indicates a pattern characteristic of the Depression era. And where there are this many examples, there are likely more examples waiting to be noticed or remembered. On the other hand, no critic, to my knowledge, has remarked such a pattern before, and so it could have gone unnoticed for other eras as well. Nevertheless, by reading the pattern through the mass unemployment of the Depression (which would not exactly apply to Kresenskys and Dahlbergs works, from just before the Depression), we can see it as not just a matter of making a queer, or eroticizing begging, or even life on the down and out. It is a matter of 114 American Literature Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 all those things together with the Depression-specific history of ramped-up anxiety about the fragility of conventional models of bread- winning, confident, unwavering, heterosexual, cisgender masculinity. And so when we read all these examples together as a collective por- trait, they queer the masses of down-and-out unemployed men whose unloosed gender stirred up a national anxiety of precarious masculin- ity. The stiff thus emerges as an everyman whose denaturalized gen- der still trades on the naturalizing of masculinity that lets the man in everyman threaten, however presumptuously, to stand in for both men and women and so represent what might lie in wait, as the Depression goes on, for all men and all women. Robert Dale Parker is the James M. Benson Professor in English at the University of Illinois. He has published books on William Faulkner, a book on Elizabeth Bishop, several books on Native American literature, and How to Interpret Literature: Critical Theory for Literary and Cultural Studies (Oxford Univ. Press). This essay is the first installment of his new book project on US literature from the Great Depression. Notes 1 See Golds 1921 Towards Proletarian Art. Gold continued to develop his argument for proletarian art in many writings. See especially his Notes of the Month from 1930. Critics of diverse and often competing persua- sions have had much to say about proletarian literature in the United States and elsewhere. See, for example, Murphy 1991; Rabinowitz 1991; Foley 1993; Hapke 1995; Denning 1997, esp. 6467, 20058; and Wald 2002. While Gold was perhaps the most persistent US polemicist in these debates, his literary critical polemics, as Murphy (1991, 6468, 12134) notes, were not as reflexively formulaic or consistent as many commenta- tors have supposed. On Gold as a left literary intellectual, see especially Bloom 1992 and Wald 2002, 3970. 2 For a broader discussion of KromersWaiting for Nothing and the overall poetics of the stiff, including the term stiff in comparison to such terms as tramp, hobo, and bum, see Parker 2018. Kromers novel has not received extensive criticism. For the most extended discussions, see Stott 1976, 3637, 19698; Casciato and West 1986; Crawford 1990; Solomon 1996; and Freeman 1998. Briefer discussions include Crouse 1986, 1038, 161; Ditsky 1988; Hapke 1995, 5054; and Obropta 1995. See Parker 2018 for contemporary reviews, which were mostly extremely favorable. For read- ings of US proletarian literature and art as preoccupied with remascul- inizing a heterosexual masculinity eventually made yet more vulnerable How to Make a Queer 115 Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 by the mass unemployment of the Depression, ranging from Golds writ- ings to the public art of the New Deal, see Penner 2011, esp. 166; and Armengol 2013. 3 People who count such things may have overlooked female transients more often than they overlooked male transients. Even if only 3 percent of unattached transients were women, that represents a huge increase in numbers compared to before the Depression. For these statistics, see Kusmer 2002, 2067. The literary, journalistic, and sociological writing about unattached transients in the Depression focuses heavily on men. 4 On female prostitutes in US novels from the Depression, see Hapke 1995, 5058, although her excellent discussion conflatesWaiting for Noth- ing and Hungry Men. 5 Indeed, Kromer harshly criticized Andersons Hungry Men for making the life of a stiff look too easy. In Hungry Men, Kromer (1986a, 237) com- plained, you find no Hungry Men. 6 On Tully, see Bauer and Dawidziak 2011. Lennon (2014, esp. 85104) reads Beggars of Life as a communal portrait of hobos, part of a larger hobo resistance to capitalism. 7 For a similar reading of Trasks approach, framed as a criticism of inter- preting modernism through a middle-class, consumerist desire to appro- priate the lower class, see Jones 2008, 12. 8 Criticism about Maltzs writing includes helpful overviews by Salzman 1978; Robb 1991; and Wald 2007, 7687. Salzman and Robb provide bibliographies of Maltzs writing but do not include Onward Christian Soldiers. 9 For statistics, however unreliable, about the proportion of hobos (before the Depression) who identified as perverts and the proportion of stiffs (in 1935) who told sociologists that they engaged in homosexual prac- tices, see Sutherland and Locke 1936, 131; and Chauncey 1994, 397n56. See also Kusmer 2002, 14143. For an extensively researched account of official and popular worries about perversion among hobosand then during the Depression among unattached male transients, stiffssee Canaday 2009, 91134. 10 For the history of Euro-American interpretations of same-sex desire as either situational or congenital and for situational homosexuality in rela- tion to other 1930s US literature, see Kahan 2013. 11 Here my argument about queer unreadability builds off Scott Herrings (2007) different but complementary critique of assumptions about the legibility of queer tramping. 12 For a sampling of parallel accounts of the same and related lingo in hobo or tramp slang, see Tully 1924, 13032, 216; and Irwin 1931, 110, 151, 152, 196. 116 American Literature Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 References Algren, Nelson. 1987. Somebody in Boots. New York: Thunders Mouth. First published 1935. Anderson, Edward. 1935. Hungry Men. Garden City, NY: Doubleday. Anderson, Nels. 1923. The Hobo: The Sociology of the Homeless Man. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press. Armengol, Josep M. 2013. Embodying the Depression: Male Bodies in 1930s American Culture and Literature. In Embodying Masculinities: Towards a History of the Male Body in U.S. Culture and Literature, edited by Josep M. Armengol, 3148. New York: Peter Lang. Bauer, Paul J., and Mark Dawidziak. 2011. Jim Tully: American Writer, Irish Rover, Hollywood Brawler. Kent, OH: Kent State Univ. Press. Berg, Louis. 1932. Prison Doctor. New York: Brentanos. . 1934a. Prison Nurse. New York: Macauley. . 1934b. Revelations of a Prison Doctor. New York: Minton, Balch. Bloom, James D. 1992. Left Letters: The Culture Wars of Mike Gold and Joseph Freeman. New York: Columbia Univ. Press. Canaday, Margot. 2009. The Straight State: Sexuality and Citizenship in Twentieth- Century America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press. Casciato, Arthur D., and James L. W. West III. 1986. Afterword: In Search of Tom Kromer. In Kromer 1986c, 26191. Chauncey George. 1994. Gay New York: Gender, Urban Culture, and the Mak- ing of the Gay Male World, 18901940. New York: Basic Books. Conal, Barney. 1934. Maddeningly Subversive. New Masses 11, no. 4: 24. Conroy, Jack. 1991. The Disinherited. Columbia: Univ. of Missouri Press. First published 1933. Constable and Co. 1986. Why Chapter IV Is Missing from Waiting for Noth- ing. In Kromer 1986c, 27374. First published 1935. Crawford, Hugh. 1990. On the Fritz: Tom Kromers Imaging of the Machine. South Atlantic Review 55, no. 2: 10116. Crosby, Bing (vocalist). 1932. Brother, Can You Spare a Dime? Lyrics by E. Y. Yip Harburg, music by Jay Gorney. ARC-Brunswick BR6414. Crouse, Joan M. 1986. The Homeless Transient in the Great Depression: New York State, 19291941. Albany: SUNY Press. Dahlberg, Edward. 1929. Bottom Dogs. London: Putnams. Denning, Michael. 1997. The Cultural Front: The Laboring of American Culture in the Twentieth Century. London: Verso. Ditsky, John. 1988. The Depressions Graveyard Ghosts: A Shared Motif in Waiting for Nothing and The Grapes of Wrath. International Fiction Review 15, no. 1: 2122. Douglas, Lord Alfred. 1896. Two Loves. In Poems, 10410. Paris: Mercvre de France. How to Make a Queer 117 Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 Foley, Barbara. 1993. Radical Representations: Politics and Form in U.S. Prole- tarian Fiction, 19291941. Durham, NC: Duke Univ. Press. Freeman, Angela B. 1998. The Origins and Fortunes of Negativity: The West Virginia Worlds of Kromer, Pancake, and Benedict. Appalachian Journal 25, no. 3: 24469. Frost, Robert. 1979. Acquainted with the Night. In The Poetry of Robert Frost, edited by Edward Connery Lathem, 255. New York: Holt. Giddins, Gary. 2001. Bing Crosby: A Pocketful of Dreams: The Early Years, 19031940. Boston: Little, Brown. Gidlow, Elsa. 1934. Breadline. New Masses 10, no. 11: 24. Gold, Mike [as Irwin Granich]. 1921. Towards Proletarian Art. Liberator 4, no. 2: 2025. . 1930. Notes of the Month. New Masses 6, no. 4: 45. Hapke, Laura. 1995. Daughters of the Great Depression: Women, Work, and Fic- tion in the American 1930s. Athens: Univ. of Georgia Press. Herring, Scott. 2007. Queering the Underworld: Slumming, Literature, and the Undoing of Lesbian and Gay History. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press. Irwin, Godfrey. 1931. American Tramp and Underworld Slang. London: Partridge. Jones, Gavin. 2008. American Hungers: The Problem of Poverty in U.S. Litera- ture, 18401945. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press. Kahan, Benjamin. 2013. The Walk-in Closet: Situational Homosexuality and Homosexual Panic in Hellmans The Childrens Hour. Criticism 55, no. 2: 177201. Kresensky, Raymond. 1928. 50-Cent Flop. New Masses 4, no. 1: 18. Kromer, Tom. 1986a. AVery Sad Blurb. In Kromer 1986c, 23740. . 1986b.Waiting for Nothing. In Kromer 1986c, 1129. . 1986c. Waiting for Nothing and Other Writings. Edited by Arthur D. Casciato and James L. W. West III. Athens: Univ. of Georgia Press. Kusmer, Kenneth L. 2002. Down and Out, on the Road: The Homeless in Ameri- can History. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. Lennon, John. 2014. Boxcar Politics: The Hobo in U.S. Culture and Literature, 18691956. Amherst: Univ. of Massachusetts Press. Maltz, Albert. 1934. Onward Christian Soldiers. New Masses 10, no. 11: 2324. Murphy, James F. 1991. The Proletarian Moment: The Controversy over Leftism in Literature. Urbana: Univ. of Illinois Press. Newhouse, Edward. 1934. You Cant Sleep Here. New York: Macaulay. Obropta, Mary. 1995. Kromers Waiting for Nothing. Explicator 53, no. 2: 11114. Orwell, George. 1933. Down and Out in Paris and London. London: Victor Gollancz. Park, Robert E. 1925. The Mind of the Hobo. In The City: Suggestions for Investigation of Human Behavior in the Urban Environment, edited by 118 American Literature Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019 Robert E. Park, Ernest W. Burgess, and Roderick D. McKenzie, 15660. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press. Parker, Robert Dale. 2018. A Poetics of the Great Depression: Style and Aes- thetics in Tom KromersWaiting for Nothing. Studies in American Fiction 45, no. 2: 23557. Penner, James. 2011. Pinks, Pansies, and Punks: The Rhetoric of Masculinity in American Literary Culture. Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press. Rabinowitz, Paula. 1991. Labor and Desire: Womens Revolutionary Fiction in Depression America. Chapel Hill: Univ. of North Carolina Press. Rexroth, Kenneth. 1968. Stiffs on the Road. Review of Waiting for Nothing, by Tom Kromer. New York Times Book Review, April 21. . 1978. Elsa Gidlows Sapphic Songs. American Poetry Review 7, no. 1: 20. Robb, Kenneth A. 1991. Albert Maltz. In American Short-Story Writers, 19101945. Dictionary of Literary Biography 102, edited by Bobby Allen Kimbel, 2038. Detroit: Gale. Salzman, Jack. 1978. Albert Maltz. Boston: Twayne. Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. 1998. Epistemology of the Closet. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press. Solomon, William. 1996. Politics and Rhetoric in the Novel in the 1930s. American Literature 68, no. 4: 799818. Stott, William. 1976. Documentary Expression and Thirties America. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press. Sutherland, Edwin H., and Harvey J. Locke. 1936. Twenty Thousand Homeless Men: A Study of Unemployed Men in the Chicago Shelters. Philadelphia: Lippincott. Trask, Michael. 2003. Cruising Modernism: Class and Sexuality in American Literature and Social Thought. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univ. Press. Tully, Jim. 1924. Beggars of Life: A Hobo Autobiography. New York: A. and C. Boni. Wald, Alan M. 2002. Exiles from a Future Time: The Forging of the Mid- Twentieth-Century Literary Left. Chapel Hill: Univ. of North Carolina Press. . 2007. Trinity of Passion: The Literary Left and the Antifascist Crusade. Chapel Hill: Univ. of North Carolina Press. How to Make a Queer 119 Downloaded from https://read.dukeupress.edu/american-literature/article-pdf/91/1/91/561943/91parker.pdf by NEW YORK UNIVERSITY user on 07 May 2019