Fantasy File Attachment 20003869coverv05b.jpg New Accents General Editor: TERENCE HAWKES FANTASY: THE LITERATURE OF SUBVERSION IN THE SAME SERIES The Empire Writes Back: Theory and practice in post-colonial literatures Bill Ashcroft, Gareth Griffiths and Helen Tiffin Literature, Politics and Theory: Papers from the Essex Conference 197684 ed. Francis Barker, Peter Hulme, Margaret Iversen and Diana Loxley Translation Studies Susan Bassnett Rewriting English: Cultural politics of gender and class Janet Batsleer, Tony Davies, Rebecca ORourke and Chris Weedon Critical Practice Catherine Belsey Formalism and Marxism Tony Bennett Dialogue and Difference: English for the nineties ed. Peter Brooker and Peter Humm Telling Stories: A theoretical analysis of narrative fiction Steven Cohan and Linda M.Shires Alternative Shakespeares ed. John Drakakis The Semiotics of Theatre and Drama Keir Elam Reading Television John Fiske and John Hartley Literature and Propaganda A.P.Foulkes Linguistics and the Novel Roger Fowler Return of the Reader: Reader-response criticism Elizabeth Freund Making a Difference: Feminist literary criticism ed. Gayle Greene and Copplia Kahn Superstructuralism: The philosophy of structuralism and post-structuralism Richard Harland Structuralism and Semiotics Terence Hawkes Subculture: The meaning of style Dick Hebdige Dialogism: Bakhtin and his world Michael Holquist Popular Fictions: Essays in literature and history ed. Peter Humm, Paul Stigant and Peter Widdowson The Politics of Postmodernism Linda Hutcheon Sexual/Textual Politics: Feminist literary theory Toril Moi Deconstruction: Theory and practice Christopher Norris Orality and Literacy Walter J.Ong The Unusable Past: Theory and the study of American literature Russell J.Reising Narrative Fiction: Contemporary poetics Shlomith Rimmon-Kenan Adult Comics: An introduction Roger Sabin Criticism in Society Imre Salusinszky Metafiction Patricia Waugh Psychoanalytic Criticism: Theory in practice Elizabeth Wright ROSEMARY JACKSON FANTASY: THE LITERATURE OF SUBVERSION LONDON AND NEW YORK First published in 1981 by Methuen & Co. Ltd This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2009. To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledges collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.  1981 Rosemary Jackson All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers. British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data Jackson, Rosemary Fantasy, the literature of subversion.(New accents). 1. Fantastic fiction, EuropeanHistory and criticism 2. European fiction18th centuryHistory and criticism 3. European fiction19th centuryHistory and criticism 4. European fiction20th centuryHistory and criticism I. Title II. Series 809.3915 PN3435 8041387 ISBN 0-203-13039-1 Master e-book ISBN ISBN 0-203-17726-6 (Adobe ebook Reader Format) ISBN 0-415-02562-1 (Print Edition) CONTENTS General Editors Preface vi Acknowledgements vii 1 INTRODUCTION 1 Part One: Theory 2 THE FANTASTIC AS A MODE 8 The imagination in exile 8 The real under scrutiny 11 The marvellous, mimetic and fantastic 15 Non-signification 22 Topography, themes, myths 25 3 PSYCHOANALYTICAL PERSPECTIVES 36 The uncanny 37 Metamorphosis and entropy 42 Disintegrated bodies 48 Part Two: Texts 4 GOTHIC TALES AND NOVELS 57 5 FANTASTIC REALISM 73 6 VICTORIAN FANTASIES 83 7 FROM KAFKAS METAMORPHOSIS TO PYNCHONS ENTROPY 92 8 AFTERWORD: THE UNSEEN OF CULTURE 100 Notes 106 Bibliography 112 Name Index 121 Subject Index 125 GENERAL EDITORS PREFACE How can we recognise or deal with the new? Any equipment we bring to the task will have been designed to engage with the old: it will look for and identify extensions and developments of what we already know. To some degree the unprecedented will always be unthinkable. The New Accents series has made its own wary negotiation around that paradox, turn- ing it, over the years, into the central concern of a continuing project. We are obliged, of course, to be bold. Change is our proclaimed business, innovation our announced quarry, the accents of the future the language in which we deal. So we have sought, and still seek, to confront and respond to those developments in literary studies that seem crucial aspects of the tidal waves of transformation that continue to sweep across our culture. Areas such as structuralism, post-structuralism, feminism, marxism, semiotics, subculture, decon- struction, dialogism, post-modernism, and the new attention to the nature and modes of language, politics and way of life that these bring, have already been the primary concern of a large number of our volumes. Their nuts and bolts exposition of the issues at stake in new ways of writing texts and new ways of reading them has proved an effective stratagem against perplexity. But the question of what texts are or may be has also become more and more com- plex. It is not just the impact of electronic modes of communication, such as computer networks and data banks, that has forced us to revise our sense of the sort of material to which the process called reading may apply. Satellite television and supersonic travel have eroded the traditional capacities of time and space to confirm prejudice, reinforce ignorance, and conceal significant difference. Ways of life and cultural practices of which we had barely heard can now be set compellingly besidecan even confrontour own. The effect is to make us ponder the culture we have inherited; to see it, perhaps for the first time, as an intricate, continuing construction. And that means that we can also begin to see, and to question, those arrangements of foregrounding and backgrounding, of stressing and repressing, of placing at the centre and of restricting to the periphery, that give our own way of life its distinctive character. Small wonder if, nowadays, we frequently find ourselves at the boundaries of the prec- edented and at the limit of the thinkable: peering into an abyss out of which there begin to lurch awkwardly-formed monsters with unaccountableyet unavoidabledemands on our attention. These may involve unnerving styles of narrative, unsettling notions of history, unphilosophical ideas about philosophy, even un-childish views of comics, to say nothing of a host of barely respectable activities for which we have no reassuring names. In this situation, straightforward elucidation, careful unpicking, informative bibliogra- phies, can offer positive help, and each New Accents volume will continue to include these. But if the project of closely scrutinising the new remains nonetheless a disconcerting one, there are still overwhelming reasons for giving it all the consideration we can muster. The unthinkable, after all, is that which covertly shapes our thoughts. TERENCE HAWKES ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I WOULD like to thank many friends and colleagues for their encouragement whilst I was writing this book. I am particularly grateful to Dr Linda Gillman, who was immensely generous with her ideas, criticism and love, and to Dr Allon White, who offered invaluable intellectual help. Thanks to students and lecturers in the School of English and American Studies, University of East Anglia, especially to Jon Cook, David Punter, Don Ranvaud and Dr Allan Smith. Also many thanks to Gay Clifford, Ann Cook, Michael DaCosta, Grard van Eyk, Dr Penny Florence, Barbara Lloyd, Mary Smart, Geoffrey Summerfield, Nicole Ward-Jouve. And to my son, Adam. ROSEMARY JACKSON UNIVERSITY OF EAST ANGLIA, 1980 Note Editions of primary literary texts are identified in the notes which are printed, by chapter, before the bibliography. All secondary works (including those mentioned in the notes) are listed in the bibliography, in alphabetical order under the name of the author. Only the perverse fantasy can still save us. Goethe Literature of the fantastic is concerned to describe desire in its excessive forms as well as in its various transformations or perversions. Todorov When our eye sees a monstrous deed, our soul stands still. Fassbinder The only thing you can do if you are trapped in a reflection is to invert the image. Juliet Mitchell 1 INTRODUCTION Human nature, essentially changeable, unstable as the dust, can endure no restraint; limits which my capacity for thought imposes upon me are narrow enough, but the province to be traversed here is infinite. Franz Kafka, The Great Wall of China1 FANTASY, both in literature and out of it, is an enormous and seductive subject. Its asso- ciation with imagination and with desire has made it an area difficult to articulate or to define, and indeed the value of fantasy has seemed to reside in precisely this resistance to definition, in its free-floating and escapist qualities. Literary fantasies have appeared to be free from many of the conventions and restraints of more realistic texts: they have refused to observe unities of time, space and character, doing away with chronology, three- dimensionality and with rigid distinctions between animate and inanimate objects, self and other, life and death. Given this resistance of fantasy to narrow categorization and defini- tion, it might seem self-defeating to attempt to produce a critical study which proposes to schematize or theorize about fantasy in literature and thereby to militate against escap- ism or a simple pleasure principle. Since this book does attempt such a study, it is best, perhaps, to try to clarify at the outset some of the theoretical and critical assumptions upon which it is based. English literary criticism has been notoriously untheoretical in its approach to works of fantasy, as to other texts. Despite the growth of interdisciplinary studies in British institu- tions during the last decade, the impact of Marxist, linguistic and psychoanalytic theory upon readings of literature has been safely buffered by a solid tradition of liberal human- ism, nowhere more so than in readings of fantasy, where a transcendentalist criticism has seemed to be justified. Literature of the fantastic has been claimed as transcending reality, escaping the human condition and constructing superior alternate, secondary worlds. From W.H. Auden, C.S.Lewis and J.R.R.Tolkien, this notion of fantasy literature as fulfill- ing a desire for a better, more complete, unified reality has come to dominate readings of the fantastic, defining it as an art form providing vicarious gratification. This book aims to locate such a transcendentalist approach as part of a nostalgic, humanistic vision, of the same kind as those romance fictions produced by Lewis, Tolkien, T.H.White and other modern fabulists, all of whom look back to a lost moral and social hierarchy, which their fantasies attempt to recapture and revivify. Particularly pertinent to an argument against transcendentalist fiction and criticism is a famous passage from The German Ideology, in which Marx and Engels urge the importance of situating art within the historical and cultural framework from which it is produced. They write: In direct contrast to German philosophy which descends from heaven to earth, here we ascend from earth to heaven. The phantoms formed in the human brain are if it binds itself it soon begins to tear madly at its bonds, until it rends everything lightning flashes any longer from the long since vanished thunder-clouds. The asunder, the wall, the bonds and its very self My inquiry is purely historical; no 2 Fantasy: The Literature of Subversion also, necessarily, sublimates of their [mens] material life process, which is empirically verifiable and bound to material premises. (p. 47) Like any other text, a literary fantasy is produced within, and determined by, its social context. Though it might struggle against the limits of this context, often being articulated upon that very struggle, it cannot be understood in isolation from it. The forms taken by any particular fantastic text are determined by a number of forces which intersect and inter- act in different ways in each individual work. Recognition of these forces involves placing authors in relation to historical, social, economic, political and sexual determinants, as well as to a literary tradition of fantasy, and makes it impossible to accept a reading of this kind of literature which places it somehow mysteriously outside time altogether. In a book of this length, it is impossible to consider all, or many, of these determinants in connection with every text, but my approach throughout is founded on the assumption that the literary fantastic is never free. Although surviving as a perennial mode and present in works by authors as different as Petronius, Poe and Pynchon, the fantastic is transformed according to these authors diverse historical positions. A more extensive treatment would relate texts more specifically to the conditions of their production, to the particular constraints against which the fantasy protests and from which it is generated, for fantasy characteristically attempts to compensate for a lack resulting from cultural constraints: it is a literature of desire, which seeks that which is experienced as absence and loss. In expressing desire, fantasy can operate in two ways (according to the different mean- ings of express): it can tell of, manifest or show desire (expression in the sense of por- trayal, representation, manifestation, linguistic utterance, mention, description), or it can expel desire, when this desire is a disturbing element which threatens cultural order and continuity (expression in the sense of pressing out, squeezing, expulsion, getting rid of something by force). In many cases fantastic literature fulfils both functions at once, for desire can be expelled through having been told of and thus vicariously experienced by author and reader. In this way fantastic literature points to or suggests the basis upon which cultural order rests, for it opens up, for a brief moment, on to disorder, on to illegality, on to that which lies outside the law, that which is outside dominant value systems. The fantastic traces the unsaid and the unseen of culture: that which has been silenced, made invisible, tions, from expression as manifestation to expression as expulsion, is one of the recurrent features of fantastic narrative, as it tells of the impossible attempt to realize desire, to make visible the invisible and to discover absence. Telling implies using the language of the into disorder can only begin from a base within the dominant cultural order, literary fantasy is a telling index of the limits of that order. Its introduction of the unreal is set against the category of the reala category which the fantastic interrogates by its difference. As a literature of unreality, fantasy has altered in character over the years in accordance with changing notions of what exactly constitutes reality. Modern fantasy is rooted in ancient myth, mysticism, folklore, fairy tale and romance. The most obvious starting point for this study was the late eighteenth centurythe point at which industrialization transformed western society. From about 1800 onwards, those fantasies produced within a capitalist economy express some of the debilitating psychological ef- fects of inhabiting a materialistic culture. They are peculiarly violent and horrific. dominant order and so accepting its norms, recovering its dark areas. Since this excursion covered over and made absent. The movement from the first to the second of these func- Introduction 3 This book concentrates upon literary fantasies of the last two centuries, fantasies pro- duced within a post-Romantic, secularized culture. One purpose of drawing together a number of different texts of this period was to see what features, if any, they had in com- mon, and what conclusions might be drawn from their possible identification. It was in the course of reading and comparing a wide variety of fiction, from Gothic novels, through Dickens and Victorian fantasists, to Dostoevsky, Kafka, Peake and Pynchon, that a pattern began to emerge for me, a pattern which suggested that similarities on levels of theme and structure were more than coincidental. The most important and influential critical study of fantasy of this post-Romantic period is Tzvetan Todorovs The Fantastic: A Structural Approach to a Literary Genre (1973). The value of Todorovs work in encouraging serious critical engagement with a form of literature which had been dismissed as being rather frivolous or foolish cannot be over- estimated, and anyone working in this area has to acknowledge a large debt to his study. Previous French critics, such as P.-G. Castex, Marcel Schneider, Louis Vax and Roger Caillois, had tried to define literary fantasy by cataloguing its recurrent themes and motifs, taken rather randomly from various works. Schneider had claimed the fantastic as drama- tizing the anxiety of existence, whilst Caillois described it as a form which was stranded between a serene mysticism and a purely humanistic psychology. Todorov has little time for metaphysics and he opposes impressionistic attempts to define fantasy. He is not inter- ested in the semantic approach of many other critics (looking for clusters of subjects and for the meaning of the fantastic in these subjects), and he turns instead to a structural analy- sis of fantastic literature, seeking structural features which different texts have in common and which might provide a more concrete definition of the fantastic, Nevertheless, there are some important omissions in Todorovs book, and it was in an attempt to go some way towards filling these that the present work was begun. For, in com- mon with much structuralist criticism, Todorovs The Fantastic fails to consider the social and political implications of literary forms. Its attention is confined to the effects of the text and the means of its operation. It does not move outwards again to relate the forms of liter- ary texts to their cultural formation. It is in an attempt to suggest ways of remedying this that my study tries to extend Todorovs investigation from being one limited to the poetics of the fantastic into one aware of the politics of its forms. Fantasy in literature deals so blatantly and repeatedly with unconscious material that it seems rather absurd to try to understand its significance without some reference to psychoanalysis and psychoanalytic readings of texts. Yet Todorov repudiates Freudian theory as inadequate or irrelevant when approaching the fantastic. I take this to be the major blind-spot of his book and one which is bound up with his neglect of political or ideological issues. For it is in the unconscious that social structures and norms are repro- duced and sustained within us, and only by redirecting attention to this area can we begin to perceive the ways in which the relations between society and the individual are fixed. As Juliet Mitchell writes, The way we live as ideas the necessary laws of human society is not so much con- scious as unconsciousthe particular task of psychoanalysis is to decipher how we acquire our heritage of the ideas and laws of human society within the unconscious mind, or, to put it another way, the unconscious mind is the way in which we acquire these laws.2 4 Fantasy: The Literature of Subversion Psychoanalysis directs itself towards an unravelling of these laws, trying to comprehend how social structures are represented and sustained within and through us in our uncon- scious. Literary fantasies, expressing unconscious drives, are particularly open to psychoan- alytic readings, and frequently show in graphic forms a tension between the laws of human society and the resistance of the unconscious mind to those laws. I shall discuss some of these features in the chapter on fantasy and psychoanalysis, returning to the work of Freud and referring to the writings of Jacques Lacan as providing a theoretical base in approach- ing the relation between ideology and unconscious life. In many ways this chapter provides the centre of my arguments and is the most crucial in trying to stretch Todorovs ideas into a more widely based cultural study of the fantastic. This study is divided into two sections. The first section is theoretical, examining the conditions and the possibilities of fantasy as a literary mode in terms of its forms, features, basic elements and structures. The term mode is being employed here to identify structural features underlying various works in different periods of time. For when we speak of a mode, what can we mean but that this particular type of liter- ary discourse is not bound to the conventions of a given age, nor indissolubly linked to a given type of verbal artifact, but rather persists as a temptation and a mode of expression across a whole range of historical periods, seeming to offer itself, if only intermittently, as a formal possibility which can be revived and renewed.3 It could be suggested that fantasy is a literary mode from which a number of related genres emerge. Fantasy provides a range of possibilities out of which various combinations pro- duce different kinds of fiction in different historical situations. Borrowing linguistic terms, the basic model of fantasy could be seen as a language, or langue, from which its various forms, or paroles, derive. Out of this mode develops romance literature or the marvellous (including fairy tales and science fiction), fantastic literature (including stories by Poe, Isak Dinesen, Maupassant, Gautier, Kafka, H.P. Lovecraft) and related tales of abnormal psychic states, delusion, hallucination, etc. This is not to imply that an ideal theoretical model exists to which all fantasies should conform. There is no abstract entity called fantasy; there is only a range of different works which have similar structural characteristics and which seem to be generated by similar unconscious desires. Through their particular manifestations of desire, they can be associated together. The possibilities available to each particular text are determined, in many ways, by the texts which have preceded it and whose characteristic features it repeats or repudiates. Like dreams, with which they have many similarities, literary fantasies are made up of many elements re-combined, and are inevitably determined by the range of those constitutive elements available to the author/dreamer. Freud writes, The creative imagination, indeed, is quite incapable of inventing anything; it can only combine compo- nents that are strange to one another.4 Again, In the psychic life, there is nothing arbitrary, nothing undetermined.5 Fantasy is not to do with inventing another non-human world: it is not transcendental. It has to do with inverting elements of this world, re-combining its constitutive features in new relations to produce something strange, unfamiliar and apparently new, absolutely other and different. The theoretical section, then, introduces critical material on literary fantasy, both from a structuralist position, looking at the narrative qualities of the mode, and from a psychoanalytical perspective, considering these features as the narrative effects of basic psychic impulses. Introduction 5 The second section of the book looks at a number of texts in a little more detail. It does not attempt a comprehensive survey of post-Romantic fantasy, but it does include a wide variety of diverse works to give a sense of the striking recurrence and similarity of several thematic and formal clusters. It thus reinforces the argument against any particular fantasys difference or peculiarity. Detailed exposition has, unfortunately, had to be sacrificed. As to the selection of texts, there is reference to French, German, Russian and American literature, but the bias is quantitatively towards English works, for reasons of familiarity and convenience. Texts which receive most attention are those which reveal most clearly some of the points raised in the theoretical sectionnot in order to prove a hypothetical argument, but because it is in these works that the subversive function of the fantastic is most apparent. impulses towards transgression, some move towards the extreme position which will be found in Sades writings, and attempt to remain open, dissatisfied, endlessly desiring. Those texts which attempt that movement and that transgressive function have been given most space in this book, for in them the fantastic is at its most uncompromising in its interrogation of the nature of the real. One consequence of this focus is that some of the better known authors of fantasy works (in the popular sense) are given less space than might be expected. For example, the best- selling fantasies by Kingsley, Lewis, Tolkien, Le Guin or Richard Adams are not discussed at great length. This is not simply through prejudice against their particular ideals, nor through an attempt to recommend other texts as more progressive in any easy way, but because they belong to that realm of fantasy which is more properly defined as faery, or romance literature. The moral and religious allegories, parables and fables informing the found at the centre of the purely fantastic. Their original impulse may be similar, but they move from it, expelling their desire and frequently displacing it into religious longing and nostalgia. Thus they defuse potentially disturbing, anti-social drives and retreat from any repressed are given correspondingly more attention, not least because of the relative criti- cal neglect they have suffered to datehardly surprising in terms of the close relation that has existed between literary criticism and a body of literature which supports orthodox behaviour and conservative institutions. By the same criterion, some novelists who are not normally thought of as working within a fantastic mode are included because of the way in which elements of fantasy enter into, disrupt and disturb the body of their texts. So along- side Mary Shelley, James Hogg, Edgar Allan Poe, R.L.Stevenson and Kafka lie George Eliot, Joseph Conrad and Henry James, as well as fantastic realists such as Dickens and Dostoevsky. All of this leaves aside the pleasures (of various kinds) of reading literary fantasy. This is really another area for psychoanalysis. I can only say that I have no desire to deprive the reader of the pleasure of the text. The reluctance to let works rest as closed or innocent or pleasure-giving objects derives from a need to understand what might be going on under the cover of this pleasure. De-mystifying the process of reading fantasies will, hopefully, point to the possibility of undoing many texts which work, unconsciously, upon us. In the end this may lead to real social transformation. Although nearly all literary fantasies eventually recover desire, neutralizing their own stories of Kingsley and Tolkien move away from the unsettling implications which are profound confrontation with existential disease. Writers whose discontent is less easily BIBLIOGRAPHY This lists all secondary sources mentioned in the book, as well as indicating some other background reading. Works of literary fantasy are not included here: editions of texts are to be found in the notes. The bibliography is split into three sections. The first (a) provides a fairly comprehen- sive catalogue of general works available on literary fantasy: readers wanting introductory criticism on the subject should refer to items marked *, whilst more incisive and theoretical studies are marked **. Remaining unmarked items are either general background, or in a foreign language. Psychoanalytic theory and criticism are listed separately in the second section (b), for the sake of easy reference, whilst the third section (c) deals with some criti- cal works on individual authors. This last section does not aim to be exhaustive, but has selected works which are of especial interest in relation to some of the ideas introduced here. Although many of the items are, unfortunately, available only in French, they have been listed here, rather than excluded altogether, for English material is still very limited in its scope and method. (a) General and theoretical studies ALTHUSSER, LOUIS, Ideology and ideological state apparatuses, in Lenin and Philosophy and Other Essays (London, 1971). ARTAUD, ANTONIN, The Theatre and its Double (London, 1970). AUERBACH, ERICH, Mimesis (Princeton, 1953). ** BAKHTIN, MIKHAIL, Problems of Dostoevskys Poetics, tr. by R.W.Rotsel (Ardis, 1973). * BARCLAY, GLEN ST JOHN, Anatomy of Horror: The Masters of Occult Fiction (London, 1978). BARONIAN, JEAN BAPTISTE (ed.) La France fantastique de Balzac  Louys: anthologie (Verviers, 1973). BARTHES, ROLAND, Essais critiques (Paris, 1964). BATAILLE, GEORGES, Literature and Evil, tr. by Alastair Hamilton (London, 1973). Eroticism, tr. by M.Dalwood (London, 1962). LImpossible (Paris, 1962). BEAUVOIR, SIMONE DE, Must we burn Sade?, tr. by A. Michelson (London, 1953). * BEER, GILLIAN, The Romance (London, 1970). *Ghosts [review article of Julia Briggss Night Visitors], Essays in Criticism, 28 (July, 1978), 25964. BELLEMlN-NOL, JEAN, Des formes fantastiques aux thmes fantasmatiques, Littrature, 2 (May, 1971), 10328. BELSEY, CATHERINE, Critical Practice (London, 1980). BENNETT, TONY, Formalism and Marxism (London, 1979). ** BERSANI, LEO, A Future for Astyanax: Character and Desire in Literature (Toronto, 1976). ** BESSIRE, IRNE, Le rcit fantastique: la potique de lincertain (Paris, 1974). Bibliography 113 * BIRKHEAD, EDITH, The Tale of Terror: A Study of the Gothic Romance (London, 1921). BLANCHOT, MAURICE, Lespace littraire (Paris, 1955). Le livre  venir (Paris, 1959). Le pas au-del (Paris, 1973). BLEILER, EVERETT F., The Checklist of Fantastic Literature (Chicago, 1948). BORGES, JORGE LOUIS, Otrs Inquisiciones (Buenos Aires, 1960). * BRIGGS, JULIA, Night Visitors: The Rise and Fall of the English Ghost Story (London, 1977). BRION, MARCEL, Art Fantastique (Paris, 1961). BUBER, MARTIN, The Eclipse of God (New York, 1952). CAILLOIS, ROGER, Au coeur du fantastique (Paris, 1965). Images, Images: Essais sur le rle et les pouvoirs de limagination (Paris, 1966). (ed.) Anthologie du fantastique (Paris, 1966). CLARESON, THOMAS D. (ed.), SF: The Other Side of Realism: Essays on Modern Fantasy and Science Fiction (Ohio, 1971). CLAYBOROUGH, ARTHUR, The Grotesque in English Literature (Oxford, 1965). CLIFFORD, GAY, The Transformations of Allegory (London, 1974). COLEMAN, WILLIAM EMMET, On the discrimination of gothicisms (Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, City University, New York, 1970). COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR, Biographia Literaria, first published 1817 (London, 1965). COTT, JONATHAN (ed.) Beyond the Looking Glass: Extraordinary Works of Fairy Tale and Fantasy (New York, 1973). CULLER, JONATHAN, Structuralist Poetics (London, 1975). *Literary fantasy, in Fantasy in Literature issue of Cambridge Review, 95 (1973), 303. DALY, MARY, Gyn/Ecology: The Metaethics of Radical Feminism (London, 1979). DDYAN, CHARLES, Le thme de Faust dans la littrature europenne, 5 vols. (Paris, 195467). DERRIDA, JACQUES, Lcriture et la diffrence (Paris, 1967). DUFFY, MAUREEN, The Erotic World of Faery (London, 1974). EAGLETON, TERRY, Marxism and Literary Criticism (London, 1976). Criticism and Ideology: A Study in Marxist Literary Theory (London, 1976). ELIADE, MIRCEA, The Two and the One (Mphistophls et landrogyne), tr. by J.M.Cohen (London, 1965). * Faery, fantasy and pseudo-medievalia in twentieth-century literature, Mosaic, 10, no. 2 (Winter, 1977). FIEDLER, LESLIE A., Love and Death in the American Novel (New York, 1960). FLETCHER, ANGUS, Allegory: The Theory of a Symbolic Mode (Cornell, 1964). FOUCAULT, MICHEL, Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason, tr. by R.Howard (London, 1967). Prface  la transgression, Critique, 1956 (1963), 75169. The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences (London, 1970). 114 Bibliography FRANKL, PAUL, The Gothic: Literary Sources and Interpretations through Eight Centuries (Princ- eton, 1960). FRANZ, M.L.VON, Problems of the Feminine in Fairy Tales (New York, 1974). FRYE, NORTHROP, The mythos of summer: romance, in Anatomy of Criticism: Four Essays (Princeton, 1957). The Secular Scripture: A Study of the Structure of Romance (Harvard, 1976). GILLMAN, LINDA, The problem of language in Leiris, Bataille and Blanchot (Unpublished Ph.D dissertation, University of Cambridge, 1980). GIRARD, REN NOL, Deceit, Desire, and the Novel: Self and Other in Literary Structure, tr. by Y.Freccero (Baltimore, 1965). Violence and the Sacred, tr. by P.Gregory (Baltimore, 1977). GOETHE, JOHANN WOLFGANG VON, Truth and Fiction Relating to My Life (18111822), tr. by J.Oxenford (Boston, 1822). GUIOMAR, MICHEL, Linsolite, Revue dEsthtique, 10 (1957), 11344. Pour une potique de la peur, Problmes, 745 (1961), 90104. HARPHAM, GEOFFREY, The grotesque: first principles, Journal of Aesthetics, 34 (19756), 4618. HART, FRANCIS RUSSELL, The experiene of character in the English gothic novel, in Experience in the Novel: Selected Papers from the English Institute, ed. Roy Harvey Pearce (New York, 1968), 83105. HARTMANN, GEOFFREY, The fullness and nothingness of literature, Yale French Studies, 16 (Winter, 19556), 6378. HARVEY, W.J., Character and the Novel (London, 1965). HASSAN, IHAB, The Dismemberment of Orpheus (New York, 1971). HAWKES, TERENCE, Structuralism and Semiotics (London, 1977). HEBDIGE, DICK, Subculture: The Meaning of Style (London, 1979). HEGEL, G.W.F., The Phenomenology of Mind (1807), tr.by J.B. Baillie (London, 1931). HELLENS, FRANZ, Le fantastique rel (Paris, 1967). HOCKE, G.R., Labyrinthe de lart fantastique (Paris, 1967). HUME, ROBERT D., Gothic versus romantic: a revaluation of the gothic novel, PMLA, 84 (1969), 28290. * IRWIN, WILLIAM R., The Game of the Impossible: A Rhetoric of Fantasy (Illinois, 1976). JACKSON, ROSEMARY, Dickens and the gothic tradition (Unpublished D. Phil dissertation, University of York, 1978). The Silenced Text: Shades of Gothic in Victorian Fiction, Minnesota Review, 13 (Fall, 1979), 98112. ** JAMESON, FREDRIC, Magical narratives: romance as genre, New Literary History, 7, no. 1 (Autumn, 1975), 13363. Marxism and Form (Princeton, 1971). (Princeton, 1972). JOSIPOVICI, GABRIEL, The World and the Book (London, 1973). The Prison-House of Language: A Critical Account of Structuralism and Russian Formalism Bibliography 115 * KAYSER, WOLFGANG, The Grotesque in Art and Literature, tr. by U.Weisstein (Indiana, 1963). KENNARD, JEAN E., Number and Nightmare: Forms of Fantasy in Contemporary Fiction (Hamden, Conn., 1975). * KIELY, ROBERT, The Romantic Novel in England (Harvard, 1972). KNIGHT, EVERETT, A Theory of the Classical Novel (London, 1970). KRISTEVA, JULIA, Une potique ruine, Introductory essay to French edition of Bakhtins La potique de Dostoevsky (Paris, 1970). La rvolution du langage potique (Paris, 1976). LEAVIS, F.R., The Great Tradition (London, 1948). LESSER, SIMON, Fiction and the Unconscious (London, 1960). LVY, MAURICE, Le roman gothique anglais 17641824 (Toulouse, 1968). LEWIS, C.S., Of Other Worlds, ed. W.Hooper (London, 1966). * LOVECRAFT, HOWARD P., Supernatural Horror in Literature, introduced by E.F.Bleiler (New York, 1973). LUKCS, GEORG, The Meaning of Contemporary Realism, tr. by John and Necke Mander (London, 1963). LTHI, MAX, Once Upon a Time: On the Nature of Fairy Tales (New York, 1970). MABILLE, PIERRE, Le miroir du merveilleux (Paris, 1962). MACDONALD, GEORGE, The fantastic imagination, published in A Dish of Orts, Chiefly Papers on the Imagination, and on Shakespeare (London, 1893). MACHEREY, PIERRE, A Theory of Literary Production, tr. by Geoffrey Wall (London, 1978). MACNIECE, LOUIS, Varieties of Parable (Cambridge, 1965). MCNUTT, DAN J., The Eighteenth Century Gothic Novel: An Annotated Bibliography of Criticism and Selected Texts (New York and London, 1975). MALIN, IRVING, New American Gothic (Carbondale, 1962). * MANLOVE, C.N., Modern Fantasy: Five Studies (Cambridge, 1975). MARCUS, STEVEN, Representations: Essays on Literature and Society (New York, 1975). MARX, KARL and ENGELS, FRlZDRlCH, The German Ideology (London, 1974). Selected Works (London, 1968). ** MASSEY, IRVING, The Gaping Pig: Literature and Metamorphosis (California, 1976). MATTHEWS, J.H., Surrealism and the Novel (Michigan, 1966). MILNER, MAX, Le diable dans la littrature franaise de Cazotte  Baudelaire 17721861, 2 vols (Paris, 1960). MIYOSHI, MASAO, The Divided Self: A Perspective on the Literature of the Victorians (New York, 1969). MOERS, ELLEN, Literary Women (London, 1977). ** NASH, MARK, Vampyr and the fantastic, Screen, 17, no, 3 (Autumn, 1976), 2967. Dreyer (London, 1977). NELSON, COWRY, JR., Night thoughts on the gothic novel, Yale Review, 52 (1962), 23657. 116 Bibliography NODIER, CHARLES, Du fantastique en littrature, published by Revue de Paris, 1830. Reprinted by Baronian (see above), 1731. OWSTROWSKI, WITOLD, The fantastic and the realistic in literature: suggestions on how to define and analyse fantastic fiction, Zagadnienia Rodzajow Literackich, 9 (1966), 5471. PARSONS, COLEMAN O., Witchcraft and Demonology in Scotts Fiction: With Chapters on the Supernatural in Scottish Literature (Edinburgh, 1964). * PENZOLDT, PETER, The Supernatural in Fiction (London, 1952). PIAGET, JEAN, Judgement and Reasoning in the Child (London, 1928). PLATO, The Republic, tr. by Desmond Lee (London, 1955). 1965). PRAZ, MARIO, The Romantic Agony, tr. by A.Davidson (London, 1970). PRDAL, REN, Le cinma fantastique (Paris, 1970). * PRICKETT, STEPHEN, Victorian Fantasy (Sussex, 1979). PROPP, VLADIMIR, The Morphology of the Folk-Tale, tr. by Lawrence Scott, 2nd edn (Texas, 1968). * PUNTER, DAVID, The Literature of Terror (London, 1980). * RABKIN, ERIC S., The Fantastic in Literature (Princeton, 1976). Ranam (Recherches Anglaises et Americaines), 6 (1973), edition Le fantastique. REEVE, CLARA, The Progress of Romance (1785), ed. E.M. McGill (New York, 1930). RETINGER, JOSEPH H., Le conte fantastique dans le romantisme franais, first published Paris 1909 (Geneva, 1973). RUDWIN, M.J., The Devil in Legend and Literature (Chicago, 1931). RUSS, JOANNA, The subjunctivity of science fiction, Extrapolation, 15, part 1, 519. SADE, MARQUIS DE, Reflections on the Novel (1800), in The 120 Days of Sodom and Other Writ- ings (New York, 1966). * SARTRE, JEAN PAUL, Aminadab or the fantastic considered as a language, in Situations, I (Paris, 1947), 5672. * SCARBOROUGH, DOROTHY, The Supernatural in Modern English Fiction (New York, 1917). SCHLEGEL, FRIEDRICH, The Philosophy of Life and the Philosophy of Language (London, 1847). SCHNEIDER, MARCEL, La littrature fantastique en France (Paris, 1964). SCHOLES, ROBERT and KELLOGG, ROBERT L., The Nature of Narrative (New York, 1966). SCHOLES, ROBERT, Structural Fabulation (Indiana, 1975). Fabulation and Metafiction (Illinois, 1979). SCHUHL, PIERRE-MAXIME, Le merveilleux, la pense et laction (Paris, 1952). * SEWELL, ELlZABETH, The Field of Nonsense (London, 1952). SHOWALTER, ELAINE, A Literature of Their Own: British Women Novelists from Bront to Lessing (Princeton, 1977). SMEED, J.W., Faust in Literature (Oxford, 1975). SOLLERS, PHILIPPE, Lcriture et lexperience des limites (Paris, 1968). * PRAWER, SIEGBERT S., The Uncanny in Literature: An Apology for its Investigation (London, Bibliography 117 SORIANO, MARC, Les contes de Perrault: culture savante et traditions populaires (Paris, 1968). STERN, J.P., On Realism (London, 1973). SUMMERS, MONTAGUE, A Gothic Bibliography (London, 1941). *The Gothic Quest: A History of the Gothic Novel (London, 1938). SUVIN, DARKO, Metamorphosis of Science Fiction: On the Poetics and History of a Literary Genre (Yale, 1979). SYMONDS, JOHN ADDINGTON, Caricature, the fantastic, the grotesque, in Essays Speculative and Suggestive, 2 vols. (London, 1980), I, 24055. THALMANN, MARIANNE, The Romantic Fairy Tale: The Seeds of Surrealism (Michigan, 1964). ** THOMPSON, GARY R. (ed.), The Gothic Imagination: Essays in Dark Romanticism (Washington, 1974). ** TODOROV, TZVETAN, The Fantastic: A Structural Approach to a Literary Genre, tr. by Richard Howard (London, 1973). The fantastic in fiction, tr. by Vivienne Mylne, Twentieth Century Studies, 3 (1970), 7692. * TOLKIEN, J.R.R., On fairy stories, in Tree and Leaf (London, 1964). * VARMA, DEVENDRA P., The Gothic Flame: Being a History of the Gothic Novel in England: its Origins, Efflorescence, Disintegration, and Residuary Influences (London, 1957). VAX, LOUIS, Lart de faire peur, Critique, I (November, 1957), 91542; II (December, 1957), 102648. Le fantastique, la raison, et lart, Revue philosophique de la France et de ltranger, 86 (1961), 31948. La sduction de ltrange: tude sur la littrature fantastique (Paris, 1965). Lart et la littrature fantastiques (Paris, 1974). WAIN, MARIANNE, The double in romantic narrative: a preliminary study, Germanic Review, 36 (1961), 25768. WATT, IAN, The Rise of the Novel (London, 1957). WOLFF, ROBERT LEE, Strange Stories, and Other Explorations in Victorian Fiction (Boston, Mass., 1971). Working Paper in Cultural Studies, 10, On ideology (Birmingham, 1977). ** ZIOLKOWSKI, THEODORE, Disenchanted Images: A Literary Iconology (Princeton, 1977). (b) Psychoanalytic theory ADLAM, DI ANA et al., Psychology, ideology and the human subject, Ideology and Conscious- ness, 1 (May, 1977), 556. BOWIE, MALCOLM, Jacques Lacan, in Structuralism and Since, ed. John Sturrock (Oxford, 1979). BROWN, NORMAN O., Life Against Death: The Psychoanalytical Meaning of History (London, 1968). CIXOUS, HLNE, La fiction et ses fantmes: une lecture de lUnheimliche de Freud, Potique, 10 (1973), 199216. 118 Bibliography The character of character, tr. by Keith Cohen, New Literary History, 5, ii (Winter, 1974), 383402. Les prnoms de personne (Paris, 1974). ELLENBERGER, H.F., The Discovery of the Unconscious (New York, 1970). FREUD, SIGMUND, The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works, tr. and ed. by James Strachey, 24 vols. (London, 1953). Essay on The uncanny, vol. 17, 21752. Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis (London, 1973). HEUSCHER, JULIUS E., A Psychiatric Study of Myths and Fairy Tales: Their Origin, Meaning and Usefulness (Springfield, 1974). HUNTER, RICHARD and MACALPINE, IDA, Three Hundred Years of Psychiatry 15351860 (London, 1963). IRIGARAY, LUCE, Womens exile, Ideology and Consciousness, 1 (May, 1977) 6276. JAMESON, FREDRIC, Imaginary and symbolic in Lacan: Marxism, psychoanalytic criticism, and the problem of the subject, Yale French Studies, 55/56 (1977), 33895. KAPLAN, CORA, Language and gender, Papers on Patriarchy (Brighton, 1976), 2137. KEPPLER, C.F., The Literature of the Second Self (Tuscan, 1972). LACAN, JACQUES, The Language of the Self: The Function of Language in Psychoanalysis, intro- duced by Anthony Wilden (Baltimore and London, 1968). Ecrits: A Selection, tr. by Alan Sheridan (London, 1977). The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis, tr. by Alan Sheridan (London, 1977). LAPLANCHE, J. and PONTALIS, J-B., The Language of Psychoanalysis, tr. by Donald Nicholson- Smith (London, 1973). MARCUSE, HERBERT, Eros and Civiliation: A Philosophical Inquiry into Freud (London, 1969). MITCHELL, JULIET, Psychoanalysis and Feminism (London, 1974). RANK, OTTO, The Double: A Psychoanalytic Study, tr. and ed. by H.Tucker, Jr. (N.Carolina, 1971), REID, THOMAS, Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man (1785), ed. A.D.Woozley (London, 1941). An Inquiry into the Human Mind, On the Principles of Common Sense (1764), ed. T.Duggan (Chicago, 1970). RICHARDSON, MAURICE, The psychoanalysis of ghost stories, Twentieth Century, 166 (1959), 41931. ROGERS, ROBERT, A Psychoanalytic Study of the Double in Literature (Detroit, 1970). RUITENBEEK, HENDRIK M. (ed.), Psychoanalysis and Literature (New York, 1964). SARTRE, JEAN PAUL, Imagination: A Psychological Critique, tr. by F.Williams (Ann Arbor, 1962). TYMMS, RALPH VINCENT, Doubles in Literary Psychology (Cambridge, 1949). WEEDON, C. and BURNISTON, S., Ideology, subjectivity and the artistic text, in On Ideology, Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies (London, 1978). WHITE, ALLON H., Lclatement du sujet: the theoretical work of Julia Kristeva, Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies Working Paper (Birmingham, 1977). Bibliography 119 (c) Studies of individual authors ARNAUD, ALAlN, Bataille (Paris, 1978). 25 (1980), 98105. BACHELARD, GASTON, Lautramont (Paris, 1939). BARTHES, ROLAND, Sade, Fourier, Loyola (Paris, 1971). BATCHELOR, JOHN, Mervyn Peake: A Biographical and Critical Exploration (London, 1974). BLANCHOT, MAURICE, Lautramont et Sade (Paris, 1963). BONAPARTE, MARIE, The Life and Works of Edgar Allan Poe: A Psychoanalytic Interpretation, tr. by John Rodker (London, 1949). BROOKE-ROSE, CHRISTINE, The squirm of the true, Poetics and Theory of Literature, I (1976), 26594 and 51346; II (1977), 51762. BURKHART, CHARLES, Charlotte Bront: A Psychosexual Study of her Novels (London, 1973). CAREY, JOHN, The Violent Effigy: A Study of Dickens Imagination (London, 1973). CHITTY, SUSAN, The Beast and the Monk: A Life of Charles Kingsley (London, 1974). DAVIS, EARLE R., The Flint and the Flame: The Artistry of Charles Dickens (London, 1964). EAGLETON, TERRY, Myths of Power: A Marxist Study of the Bronts (London, 1975). EMPSON, WILLIAM, Alice in Wonderland: the child as swain, in Some Versions of Pastoral (London, 1966). FANGER, DONALD, Dostoevskys Romantic Realism: A Study of Dostoevsky in Relation to Balzac, Dickens, and Gogol (Harvard, 1965). GATTEGNO, JEAN, Folie, croyance et fantastique dans Dracula, Littrature, 8 (1972), 7283. GIFFORD, DOUGLAS, James Hogg (Edinburgh, 1976). GOLDBERG, M.A., Moral and myth in Mrs Shelleys Frankenstein, Keats-Shelley Journal, 8 (1959), 2738. HELMS, RANDEL, Myth, Magic and Meaning in Tolkiens World (London, 1974). HILLEGAS, MARK R. (ed.), The Shadows of Imagination: The Fantasies of C.S. Lewis, J.R.R, Tol- kien, and Charles Williams (S. Illinois, 1969). IDMAN, NIILO, Charles Robert Maturin: His Life and Works (London, 1923). KETTERER, DAVID, Frankensteins Creation: The Book, The Monster and Human Reality (Wellington, Univ. of Victoria, 1979). KLOSSOWSKI, PIERRE, Sade et Fourier (Paris, 1974). LARY, N.M., Dostoevsky and Dickens: A Study of Literary Influence (London, 1973). LEVINE, GEORGE and LEVERENZ, DAVID (eds.), Mindful Pleasures: Essays on Thomas Pynchon (Boston and Toronto, 1976). LEVINE, GEORGE and KNOEPFLMACHER, V.C. (eds.), The Endurance of Frankenstein: Essays on Mary Shelleys Novel (California, 1979). LINNR, SVEN, Dostoevsky on Realism (Stockholm, 1967). LYLES, W.H., Mary Shelley: An Annotated Bibliography (New York, 1975). MOGLEN, HLNE, Charlotte Bront: The Self Conceived (New York, 1976). GIRARD, REN NOL Dostoevski, du double  lunit (Paris, 1963). ASTLE, RICHARD, Dracula as totemic monster: Lacan, Freud, Oedipus and history, Substance, 120 Bibliography NORMAND, JEAN, Nathaniel Hawthorne (London, 1970). PHILLIPS, ROBERT (ed.), Aspects of Alice (London, 1971). PHILLIPS, WALTER C., Dickens, Reade and Collins: Sensation Novelists (New York, 1919). PITCHER, GEORGE, Wittgenstein, nonsense and Lewis Carroll, Massachusetts Review, 6, no.3 (Spring/Summer, 1965), 591611. PRENDERGAST, CHRISTOPHER, Balzac: Fiction and Melodrama (London, 1978). ROBERT, MARTHE, Kafka (Paris, 1960). Linconscient, creuset de loeuvre, Dostoevski (Paris, 1971). SIEGEL, MARK RICHARD, Pynchon: Creative Paranoia in Gravitys Rainbow (New York and London, 1978). SIMPSON, LOUIS, James Hogg: A Critical Study (London, 1962). SMALL, CHRISTOPHER, Mary Shelleys Frankenstein: Tracing the Myth (Pittsburgh, 1973). SPARK, MURIEL, Child of Light: A Reassessment of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley (Essex, 1951). SPILKA, MARK, Dickens and Kafka: A Mutual Interpretation (Indiana, 1963). STOEHR, TAYLOR, Dickens: The Dreamers Stance (New York, 1965). Tel Quel, 28 (Winter, 1967), volume on La pense de Sade. TODOROV, TZVETAN, The ghosts of Henry James, in The Poetics of Prose, tr. by Richard How- ard (New York, 1977). WASIOLEK, EDWARD, Dostoevsky: The Major Fiction (Cambridge, Mass., 1964). WELSH, ALEXANDER, The City of Dickens (Oxford, 1971). Womens writing: Jane Eyre, Shirley, Villette, Aurora Leigh, The Marxist-Feminist Literature Col- lective, Ideology and Consciousness, 3 (Spring, 1978), 2748. WOOLF, ROBERT LEE, The Golden Key: A Study of the Fiction of George MacDonald (New Haven, 1961). BOOK COVER TITLE COPYRIGHT CONTENTS GENERAL EDITORS PREFACE ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 1 INTRODUCTION References