Malleable Sculptures in Virginia Woolf's <em>Jacob's Room</em> and Early Travel Diaries Malleable Sculptures in Virginia Woolf's Jacob's Room and Early Travel Diaries Author(s): Imola Nagy-Seres Source: Journal of Modern Literature , Vol. 42, No. 2, Varieties of Embodiment: Whose Body? (Winter 2019), pp. 149-166 Published by: Indiana University Press Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2979/jmodelite.42.2.09 JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at https://about.jstor.org/terms Indiana University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of Modern Literature This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:47 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2979/jmodelite.42.2.09 Journal of Modern Literature Vol. 42, No. 2  Copyright  The Trustees of Indiana University  DOI 10.2979/jmodelite.42.2.09 Malleable Sculptures in Virginia Woolfs Jacobs Room and Early Travel Diaries Imola Nagy-Seres University of Exeter The body in Virginia Woolf s works has often been regarded as absent, a void filled with the flickering impressions of the psyche. Woolf s representations of flesh in Jacobs Room (1922) and her 1906 travel diaries in Greece demand an adjusted perspective: the body comes into existence at the intersections of hard matter and soft malleability. Instead of representing a hole, the flesh becomes a  hollow, defined by phenomenologist Maurice Merleau-Ponty as the mutually created meeting space between subject and other. Woolf s preoccupation with the semi-soft bodies of sculptures in her early journals and first experimental novel throws fresh light on her literary aesthetics. Distancing herself from a male tradition based on hardness and painstaking physical descriptions, Woolf proposes a more empathetic way of knowing others: the vulnerable and incomplete body acquires shape under its creators fingers, whose touch gently redraws its boundaries without annihilating its individuality. Keywords: Virginia Woolf / Maurice Merleau-Ponty / sculpture / touch In a 2016 article entitled The Trouble with Feeling Now, Sophie Ratcliffe reads Thomas Woolners sculpture Constance and Arthur (185762) in parallel with Robert Brownings poem about the sculpture, Deaf and Dumb (1868). What makes Ratcliffes article a groundbreaking study is not only her subject matter but her unusual methodology. While she investigates the statues creation and reception in its historical context, she also draws attention to the Browning Imola Nagy-Seres (in225@exeter.ac.uk) is a PhD candidate at the University of Exeter. She is currently completing her thesis on embodied fellow feeling in the modernist novel. Her fields of research and teaching include modernism, contemporary literature, phe- nomenology, and the history and theory of the novel. She regularly reviews articles for the postgraduate journal Exclamat!on published at the University of Exeter. Her article The Phenomenological Body in Elizabeth Bowens Interwar Novels has been published in the Elizabeth Bowen Review. This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:47 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms mailto:in225@exeter.ac.uk 150 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 poems limitations by arguing how a purely historical approach might obscure our emotional-tangible response to art objects (3). Ratcliffe proposes a different aesthetic approach: one based on sensuous tactility, [t]hat moment of time taken, and time taking, of making physical contact with the statue (24), rather than only a rational comprehension of the historical circumstances of its creation. Following up on Ratcliffes call to address the trouble with feeling now, I argue that certain modernist authors were already aware of the significance of affective touch in artistic experience. Virginia Woolf s Jacobs Room, read in conjunction with her early travel diaries and Maurice Merleau-Pontys phenomenologist philosophy, suggests that genuine aesthetic pleasure and interpersonal intimacy arise from tangible contact between bodies.1 My study can be situated in the new field of modernist affects. The turn to affect, according to Julie Taylor, has come relatively late in modernist studies due to the widespread interpretation of early twentieth-century literature as cold and cerebral, devoid of the sentimental superfluity of the past (2). This view, however, has been recently challenged by several modernist scholars, who have redefined the term modern as an affective orientation towards history (Taylor 2).2 While Benjamin Kohlmann has viewed the literature of the 1930s (the temporal and formal periphery of high modernism) as the most fruitful terrain for the recuper- ation of affect in modernist criticism, my work will primarily focus on the early phase of high modernism (350). This article sets out to offer an affective reading of Woolf s selected texts through a critical approach positioned at the intersection of historicism and tactile encounter, the latter meaning a whole-body sensation, experienced in the present moment. After the publication of Jacobs Room, Woolf was often accused of having failed to create plausible, flesh-and-blood characters. One of the first commen- tators on the novel, Leonard Woolf called the book a work of genius but drew attention to the strange ephemerality of characters that he describes as ghosts [. . .] puppets moved hither & thither by fate (Diary II 186). As Woolf records in the same diary entry, her husband doesnt agree that fate works in this way (186). However, while Leonard considered the novel Woolf s best work so far, other reviewers were not unequivocally convinced by her literary innovations. W.L. Courtney, a reviewer for the Daily Telegraph, for example, employs the same puppet-metaphor as Leonard Woolf, but in an undoubtedly pejorative sense: Mrs Woolf confidently chatters as though she were seated in an armchair playing with her puppets (Majumdar 104). Later critics also observed the elusive nature of Jacobs character. Kathleen Wall identifies as one of the defining characteristics of the novel the narrators limited perspective, which can be noticed in the pro- tagonists continuous absence, or what she calls the Jacob-shaped hole of the narrative (306). All these metaphorsghost, puppet, holeunderline Jacobs elusive character, which continuously escapes the readers touch by retreating into immateriality. Nevertheless, I will provide an alternative reading of the pos- sibilities and limits of touching others by showing how Woolf s ideas of intimacy can be understood through what I call the firm softness of bodies, which do not This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:47 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms Malleable Sculptures in Jacobs Room and Woolfs Travel Diaries 151 dissolve under the touchers hands but gently yield to the caressing fingers without losing their corporeal boundaries. I will primarily focus on the affective touch of women in Jacobs Room, who, through their wish to keep Jacobs memory alive, transform into the unknown female artists of the interwar period. Though Jacob remains uncatchable in the sense that female characters fail to possess him definitively, his association with a ghostas Leonard Woolf suggestsmeans missing out on important aspects of bodily intimacy in Woolf s novel. Woolf did not view her protagonists as untouchable phantoms that flicker through the minds and fingers of other char- acters (and readers). The embodied nature of characters represents a crucial issue for Woolf, but her interpretation of the body differs from that of her predecessors and contemporaries. She rejected the Edwardians obsession with material details, such as the minute description of attire, and she equally distanced herself from the literary aesthetics of some male modernists, who expressed their preference for clarity and hardness. In Jacobs Room, Woolf often places her protagonists literally in the limelight in order to show the shortcomings of Edwardian literary techniques: You could see the pattern on [Jacobs] trousers; the old thorns on his stick; his shoe laces; bare hands; and face. This was in his face. Whether we know what was in his mind is another question (81). At the same time, she rejected the hard modernism of her contemporaries, such as Ezra Pound, who proposed in his famous Imagist Manifesto that modernist poetry should be hard and clear, never blurred nor indefinite (269). The body, for Woolf, both in its sense of human flesh and art object, rep- resents an incomplete, vulnerable, and semi-soft entity that invites the others inquiring, gentle touch in order to come into existence. Woolf s understanding of corporeal intimacy can be illuminated by Merleau-Pontys phenomenologist philosophy, in which he differentiates between the physical and lived body, to appropriate Cathryn Vasseleus terms. While the physical body is reduced to mere biological functions, the lived body exists in a system of interactions, which together constitute a perceptual field (Vasseleu 28).3 By choosing the sculpted body as the main focus, I will explore the ways in which the firmly soft lived flesh is shaped by affective touch in Woolf s works. Statues have most often been associated with fixity and hardness. After the artists finishing touch, sculptures remain immobile on their pedestals, closed in the coldness of marble or other materials. However, as Kenneth Gross has explored in The Dream of the Moving Statue (1992), humans have not always viewed sculp- tures as frozen art objects. The ancient Greeks believed that statues, far from being permanently tied to a pedestal, possess freedom of movement: the wings of the victories, for example, were often chopped off so that they could not escape and leave the town unprotected (Gross xiii). Ovid records one of the most well-known myths of a living statue in Metamorphoses, where he tells the story of Pygmalion, a sculptor who carves a woman out of ivory, which then comes to life under the art- ists caressing fingers. The myth of Pygmalion and Galatea testifies to humans pre- occupation with the possibilities of the sculptors creative touch. By interrogating This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:47 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 152 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 statues association with absolute stillness, Ovids tale can be situated in the long tradition of sculptures enticing, at times even yielding to human touch. As Gross put it: The idea of a living statue might suggest a parable about our responsibility to humanly created objects, a sense that there is a life in them that demands our care, which includes the responsibility to other human beings (. . .) (9). Woolf showed a deep interest in our responsibility to living statues not only on an aesthetic level, but also in real-life interpersonal encounters. In Jacobs Room and her early travel journals, she explored the possibilities of her feeling for an art object that is not frozen in death but responds to the caressing hand, just like human beings who let themselves be shaped by the affective touch of their fellow-beings. What makes Woolf s works truly exciting is the way they oscillate between the aesthetic and real-life realms, without definitively settling in either. Her musings on sculptures suggest that caring for an art object is not simply a question of form but also a matter of life. Several critics have remarked on Woolf s fascination with statues in Jacobs Room. Kathleen Wall associates Greek art with Jacobs death (317), which chimes with Theodore Koulouriss reading that links Greek culture (predominantly lit- erature) with Woolf s poetics of loss (10). Vara Neverow elaborates on the erotic dimension of sculptures, arguing that references to statues in Jacobs Room are infused with complex nuances of desire (27), while Kirsty Martin reads sculpted surfaces as suggestions of superficial knowledge (83). I build on the above-mentioned scholarly works going further by focusing on specific features such as malleability and incompleteness, which help us to better grasp Woolf s ideas of embodied fellow feeling. Besides offering a new interpretation of statuary in Jacobs Room, I also provide a comparative analysis of statues in Woolf s first experimental novel and her early journals, two works that have not yet been read together in Woolf studies. Woolf undoubtedly relied on her travel diaries written during her 1906 trip to Greece when working on Jacobs Room. Besides the similarities in the description of statues in the two works, the novel, as many critics observe, can be read as an elegy for Virginias younger brother, Thoby Stephen, who died from typhoid shortly after their visit to Greece (Roe xvii). Although my aim is not to reveal links between Jacobs Room and Woolf s biography, I consider Jacobs resemblance to Thoby important insofar as it sheds fresh light on Woolf s ideas of memory preservation: the possibilities and limits of getting in touch with an absent beloved. Furthermore, there are striking linguistic similarities between the novel and the journal: when Jacob arrives in Athens, he contemplates the beauty of the Acropolis at sunset, when the ships in the Piraeus fire their guns (130). An almost identical phrase appears in Woolf s travel account, where she describes her delight in the streets at evening, when the sun has just sunk & the boats in the Piraeus have fired their guns (Woolf, A Passionate Apprentice 325).4 Reading Jacobs Room in parallel with Woolf s journals and Merleau-Pontys philosophy of interrelatedness opens a window onto Woolf s ideas of tactile encounters with sculptures, and by extension, with literary characters. This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:47 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms Malleable Sculptures in Jacobs Room and Woolfs Travel Diaries 153 EncounTErS In flESh: mErlEau-ponTy and JAcoBs room Merleau-Ponty illustrates our sympathetic communion with the world (includ- ing human and non-human agents) through the image of self-touch, two hands clasping each other. Genuine togetherness, however, does not occur in the exact overlapping of palms and fingers, but in that space of imperfection or hollow5 where the two hands unite without merging into an undistinguishable wholeness. In his last, unfinished work, The Visible and the Invisible (1964), Merleau-Ponty elaborates on this topic: But this hiatus between my right hand touched and my right hand touching, between my voice heard and my voice uttered, between one moment of my tactile life and the following one, is not an ontological void, a non-being: it is spanned by the total being of my body, and by that of the world; it is the zero of pressure between two solids that makes them adhere to one another. My flesh and that of the world therefore involve clear zones, clearings, about which pivot their opaque zones (. . .). (148) The zone of zero pressure is not a hole but a space devoid of violent coer- cion and desire for domination, where knowledge gained about the other will always remain incomplete. Yet for Merleau-Ponty, this imperfect understand- ing is the most complex form of fellow feeling a human being can achieve. Moreover, following on from his contention that the tactile and the visible are often inseparable, Merleau-Ponty argues that our contact with the world does not take place in pure transparency but clear zones are always enveloped in mistiness. Since the human subject itself is not a translucent object, its relation with other objects of the world is inherently ambiguous and characterized by an amalgamation of clarity and obscurity, as Merleau-Ponty points out in his late essay Eye and Mind (1960). The individual thus is not a clear glass panel, but a semi-opaque entity on the surface of which misty patches and dark shades merge with rays of light.6 Yet Merleau-Ponty does not fail to empha- size the importance of the subjects own corporeal limits. While being made of the same flesh7 as the world, the self s bodily boundaries should not be completely erased: having a front and a back, a past and a future represents ultimately one of the basic preconditions of harmonious coexistence with the universe, which contains the capacity to be touched while remaining separate (Merleau-Ponty, Eye and Mind 124). Merleau-Pontys and Woolf s ideas about intimate coexistence elucidate each other on several levels. During a visit at the home of his friend, Timmy Durrant, Jacob meets his sister Clara, whose attraction is hard to resist. Jacob offers to help Clara pick grapes in the greenhouse, where, while holding the ladder for her, he is mesmerized by her ineffable beauty: Theres another bunch higher up, murmured Clara Durrant, mounting another step of the ladder. Jacob held the ladder as she stretched out to reach the grapes high up on the vine. This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:47 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 154 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 There! she said, cutting through the stalk. She looked semi-transparent, pale, wonderfully beautiful up there among the vine leaves and the yellow and purple bunches, the lights swimming over her in coloured islands. Geraniums and begonias stood in pots along planks; tomatoes climbed the walls. The leaves really want thinning, she considered, and one green one, spread like the palm of a hand, circled down past Jacobs head. ( JR 51) As he admires Clara among the ripe bunches of grapes, Jacob observes how she gradually becomes half-transparent, at once pale and inundated with the col- ors of nature. Her paleness acquires an almost ghostlike quality, an idea further corroborated by her actions, her mounting of the step, which places her out of Jacobs yearning reach. But Woolf, notoriously preoccupied with every single word written on the pages of her novels, is careful enough not to portray her female protagonist as a mere bodiless phantom.8 Instead, the narrator emphasizes the semi-transparency of Clara, who is not clearly seeable and easily graspable nor completely obscure and untouchable. Indeed, she is partly hidden by the hanging vine leaves and grapes but simultaneously becomes a prism, absorbing sunlight and emanating the colors of the rainbow that correspond to the hues present in her natural environment: yellow and purple (grapes) and green (leaves). Clara, whose body becomes a magnified image of harmonizing colors and shapes, is described as an organic extension of her immediate surroundings, an idea also underlined by the association of her hand with a vine leaf. The falling leaf, a green one, [that] spread like the palm of a hand, draws an invisible circle around Jacobs head, before it drops to the ground. The palm-shaped leaf, as the extension of Claras hand, gently and lovingly caresses Jacobs head without definitively settling on or claiming possession of it. Read in conjunction with Merleau-Pontys concept of flesh, this scene illustrates the principles of tender togetherness: For the first time, the body no longer couples itself up with the world, it clasps another body, applying [itself to it] carefully with its whole extension, forming tire- lessly with its hands the strange statue which in its turn gives everything it receives; the body is lost outside of the world and its goals, fascinated by the unique occupation of floating in Being with another life (. . .). (Visible 144) Applying her flesh with its whole extension to Jacobs body, Claras gesture creates a fragile yet enduring moment of physical intimacy: the leaf eventually flies past the mans head but the plants brief contact with his body opens up the possibility for mythological interpretations. The vine leaf crown transforms Jacob into the Greek god Dionysus, and as Neverow has observed, Jacob is repeatedly associated with the sculpture of Dionysus in the novel (30). The parallel between Woolf s protagonist and the god of wine and carnal joys can partly explain Jacobs state of unconscious intoxication in Claras presence: he is lost outside of the world and its goals (Merleau-Ponty, Visible 144). Yet, while drawing a link to Greek mythology, the narrative simultaneously withdraws from unambiguous This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:47 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms Malleable Sculptures in Jacobs Room and Woolfs Travel Diaries 155 interpretations: Jacobs head, after all, is not decorated with vine leaves, but only fleetingly touched by them. Hence, his longing for Clara, though undoubtedly containing elements of Dionysian eroticism, is more complex and nuanced. If Jacob turns into a statue under the womans modeling hands, he is not a fixed and perfectly polished object of art, but one that in its turn gives everything it receives (Visible 144). Claras description as a sculptor and her superior position on the top of the ladder subvert cultural stereotypes about the active male artist looking (down) on and capturing the passive female model. At the same time, the grape-picking scene can be read as a double inversion of the Greek myth: rather than Pygmalion touching Galatea imploring her to come to life, in Woolf s novel the female artist transforms the male into a statue, albeit not a fixed and lifeless one. Clara does not restrict Jacob within a rigid and definitive shape, but allows him to remain responsive to her shaping hands. Claras artistic technique based on the idea of gentle touch, which does not confine its object but contributes to the opening of its boundaries, is analogous with Woolf s own principles of character making as opposed to the literary methods employed by her male peers. ThE unBrokEn fIlES of malE TradITIon In her Notes to Jacobs Room, Sue Roe remarks that ancient Greek civilization and culture are considered male domains in Woolf s novel (170). Colin Dickey supports this view by arguing that the figure of the French female photographer, trying to get a snapshot of Jacob while he is being absorbed in the statues of the Parthenon, offer[s] a critique of the self-satisfied seriousness of men like Jacob (. . .) who judge[s] [his] mates according to classical statues (379). Indeed, sculp- tures in Jacobs Room are repeatedly linked to patriarchal order and male superior- ity. At the beginning of the novel, the narrator urges us to look at the privileged men, dons and students, who solemnly proceed toward Kings College Chapel in Cambridge: Look, as they pass into service, how airily the gowns blow out, as though nothing dense and corporeal were within. What sculpted faces, what cer- tainty, authority controlled by piety, although great boots march under the gowns. In what orderly procession they advance. (24) The sculpted surface of the body is associated with lack of inner essence, a form of artificial and shallow superficiality. Furthermore, what confers this kind of insubstantiality a genuinely threatening air is its implicit connectedness to military logic through the use of war vocabu- lary: pass into service, boots march, orderly procession, and advance. In this passage, Woolf offers a harsh critique not only of the male-dominated educational system but through analogy with the armed forces, of the First World War as well, which transformed young men into mere material containers devoid of life, individual thoughts and feelings. The distinction between male and female intellectuals, and their different ways of making and interpreting art, becomes evident during Jacobs visit to the British Museum, where the works of male authors are described as being arranged This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:47 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 156 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 in an unbroken file, excluding female writers, such as an Eliot or a Bront (90, 91). The perfectly polished pieces of male tradition fit together so exquisitely that the creation of hollows, in which the accommodation of the other could take place, remains unimaginable. In Modern Fiction (1925) Woolf linked explicitly the concept of the hollow with the literary techniques employed by modernist writers (though not exclusively women), whose methods she contrasted to the literary aesthetics of Edwardian authors. In Woolf s opinion, the problem with the novels of Arnold Bennett and his contemporaries lies in the fact that their fiction is imbued with falsity and pretence and creates a picture that is unfaith- ful to life (Essays IV 164). Life does not reside in the perfect fitting of parts, she argues, but in the crevice [where] decay can creep in, the draught between the frames of the windows, or a crack in the boards (Essays IV 158). In other words, the stuff of fiction for Woolf is born in the mutually created space between two intertwining elements (Essays IV 164). In Woolf s interpretation, lifewhich represents the stuff of fictionis infused with vulnerability and senescence, and by extension a work of art should also accommodate decay between its imperfectly matching parts. Woolf rejects the unsympathetic literary aesthetics of her male predecessors due to their lack of open-mindedness. In Jacobs Room, the narrator describes the British Museum as a solid, perfectly finished and closed male mind that refuses to open toward the other, or even to consider the possibility of softening its own rigid borders: The British Museum stood in one solid immense mound, very pale, very sleek in the rain (94). The pots and statues, great bulls and little jewels (94) and literary masterpieces created by famous male artists lie in undisturbed stillness and solemnity on the shelves, in spite of  life taking place on the streets outside the walls of the building: in spite of the woman (. . .) who has come home drunk and cries all night long, Let me in! Let me in! (94). Ignoring the womans cries, Jacob reads on, because in spite of  real-life events, Plato and Shakespeare continue, and the womans desperate pleas sound in Jacobs ears as if a coal had dropped from the fire, or a fly, falling from the ceiling, had lain on its back, too weak to turn over (94). Woolf interrogates the unbroken and imperturbable (94) mastery of male artists, who despite having created a solid foundation of tradition, fail to show solidarity with the marginalized other. Similar to the description of Cambridge dons, Woolf draws a subtle link between male artistic superiority and militarism: the unsympathetic Jacob, whose mind is completely occupied with the difficulty of Platos Phaedrus, reads straight ahead, falling into step, marching on (95, my emphasis). Hence Jacob, though undoubtedly a victim of the First World War, is also, albeit in a different context, a perpetrator of violence. However, Jacobs character and Woolf s ideas of statuary are far too complex to be simply interpreted in a patriarchal historical context. After all, as I will discuss in the next section, Jacob finds delight in unfinished statues, an idea that partly refutes the exclusive association of Greek sculptures with male dominance, as Roe and Dickey proposed. This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:47 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms Malleable Sculptures in Jacobs Room and Woolfs Travel Diaries 157 During his trip to Greece, Jacob realizes that he prefer[s] statues to pictures (131). His love for statuary, nevertheless, is directed only toward a certain kind of sculpture: the unfinished pieces, which lack certain body parts or exhibit unusual features. As he admires the slight irregularity in the line of steps, he reads in his guidebook that the artistic sense of the Greeks preferred [a certain kind of dis- tortion] to mathematical accuracy (130). While earlier in the novel statues were associated with rigidity and masculine order, Jacobs travels in Greece throw fresh light on the artistic potential of Greek sculptures and consequently on Woolf s own ideas of character modeling. At least two forms of statue-making can be distinguished in Jacobs Room: tradition building based on male prestige, as exemplified by the perfectly sculpted faces of Cambridge dons and the solid structure of the British Museum, and a mostly feminine interpretation of incomplete sculptures, associated with the safeguarding of personal memory, to which I will shortly turn. A statue left in the rough lets itself be palpated with the gaze as the viewer tries to understand and emotionally relate to the unique combination of lines, shapes and colors ( JR 130). Slight irregularit[ies] are not to be considered artistic flaws but signs of the finest artistic sense, which in contrast with scientific accuracy, leave open the way to multiple interpretations. At the same time, Woolf s fascination with unfinished statues indicates her susceptibility to human vulnerability and death. Jacob is partly fond of irregular statues because they resemble flesh-and-blood human beings, exposed to destruc- tive external forces. As such, it is probably not a mere coincidence that sculptures often appear as battered in Jacobs Room. A Greek goddess in the Erechtheum reminds Jacob of his lover, Sandra Wentworth Williams, which has a strong emotional impact on the young man who is extraordinarily moved by the stat- ues battered Greek nose (133). More importantly, the adjective battered is associated with Ulysses, and through implicit analogy, with Jacob himself. In the British Museum, Jacobs former lover Fanny Elmer spends long minutes in front of the battered Ulysses (150) in order to refresh her memory of Jacob. The asym- metrical statue of the Greek traveler represents a source of solace for the woman who secretly hopes that Jacob will eventually return to her. At the same time, the state of vulnerability is not only associated with Jacob but also with Fannys statuesque idea of Jacob (149), which as her lovers homecoming becomes more and more improbable, starts to wear thin, similarly to the womans deteriorating body that appears old and lifeless (150). Fannys visit to the British Museum indicates the double nature of vulnera- bility: on the one hand, the narrator draws constant attention to Jacobs fragility and imminent death, but the novel is also deeply sympathetic to the women who do not cease to love and long for Jacob even after their relationship ended. These female charactersClara, Florinda, Fanny, and Sandranot only are passive models posing for artists, but also become the anonymous artists of the inter- war period who consciously choose an alternative creative method. Similar to Claras artistic activity in the grape-picking scene, the other women do not wish This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:47 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 158 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 to preserve the memory of dead soldiers by erecting grandiose monuments with composed faces (136) but promote a more personal way of remembering through the chiseling of incomplete and vulnerable figures. WoolfS BaTTErEd STaTuES Suzanne Raitt argues that though centered around the death of soldiers in the First World War, Jacobs Room is also about the survival of women in a world that has lost millions of its men (42), and I would add, about the ways in which these women ensure the survival of the dead. Throughout her career, Woolf was deeply preoccupied with the malleability of human character. In January 1920, while working on Jacobs Room, she mused on the material construction of the writers body that should be pliant & rich enough to provide a wall for the book from oneself without its becoming, as in Joyce and [Dorothy] Richardson, narrowing & restricting (Diary II 14). She considered Joyce and Richardson damned egoistical and set against their writing practice a more sympathetic creative method based on the principles of firm softness: while the writer is pliant, (s)he has to simultaneously provide a solid wall that protectively surrounds and holds the book together. More importantly though, the wall has to be made of the novelists own flesh, an image reminiscent of Woolf s often-used birth metaphor for literary creation. In her feminist manifesto, A Room of Ones Own (1929), Woolf described great works of art as not single and solitary births [but] the outcome of many years of thinking in common, of thinking by the body of people, so that the experience of the mass is behind the single voice (66). Woolf s argument summarizes the basic prerequisites of creative writing: literary creation is not a radical rupture with the past but the living outcome of thinking in common and representing an organic part of the body of people while also allowing space for the single voice. Woolf s use of the birth metaphor gains special weight in this context as it clearly indicates her belonging to a matrilineal ancestry, an idea repeatedly emphasized in A Room of Ones Own, but which already preoccupied her at the time she was writing Jacobs Room. In a letter responding to Lytton Strachey who had excessively praised Jacobs Room and mentioned how Jacob reminded him of Virginias dead brother, ThobyWoolf, somehow reluctantly, admitted the romantic nature of her novel. She attributed this unequivocally to her female predecessors: How do I catch it [the romanticism]? Not from my father. I think it must have been my Great Aunts. But some of it, I think, comes from breaking with complete representation. (Letters II 5689) Woolf s answer to Strachey sum- marizes her complex attitude toward the literary past: while she clearly distanced herself from a male-dominated tradition rooted in complete representation, she also reinforced her strong bond with a female artistic line. The fact that all of Jacobs female admirers are implicitly involved in sculpture-making acquires special significance in the novel and underlines Woolf s deep concern with the figure of the anonymous female artist who, as This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:47 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms Malleable Sculptures in Jacobs Room and Woolfs Travel Diaries 159 Woolf poignantly muses in A Room of Ones Own, is an absent ghost on the shelves of the British Museum, packed with massive amounts of works by male authors (2742). In Jacobs Room, Woolf offers an implicit critique of an artistic tradition rooted exclusively in the patriarchal order and dominated by men: schoolmasters and clergymen mounting their platforms and pulpits (A Room of Ones Own 29). Woolf envisages the act of paying homage to writers and artworks of the past as statue modeling: In five years, I shall have flagged out a good book from [my readings], I hope; a rough, but vigorous statue testifying before I die to the great fun & pleasure my habit of reading has given me (Diary II 259). The seemingly paradoxical phrase rough, but vigorous represents a concise synthesis of Woolf s aesthetics, suggesting her desire to create a work of art that is at once solid and imbued with life and movement. Woolf s sympathy for vigorous statues started early in her life. It can be traced back to at least 1906, when in the company of her siblings, Vanessa, Thoby, and Adrian, and their friend Violet Dickinson, she traveled to Greece and spent some time in Athens, visiting the Acropolis. Although Woolf does not explicitly mention Thoby in her journal musings on Greek sculptures, his presence must have been significant for her, since Thoby was the person who earlier introduced her to the world of Greek culture and with whom she had lively discussions on Greek literature (Lee 144). As such, Woolf probably found delight in sharing her impressions about the Parthenon statues with her brother. Furthermore, in a letter to Violet, Woolf describes Thoby as a Greek God but rather too massive for the drawing room (Letters I 72). Similar to Thoby, the Greek God who could not be fitted inside the walls of a room, Jacob evades any attempt to be fixed and restricted within a predetermined shape. Instead, Woolf offers a more sympathetic way of reading others in her novel and diary entries. During her long walks with her siblings and Violet in Athens, Woolf became mesmerized by the beauty of Greek marbles: We also visited the Acropolis at sunset. And when you speak of colour of the Par- thenon you are simply conforming to the exigencies of language; a painter using his craft to speak by, confesses the same limitations. The Temple glows red; the whole west pediment seems kindled, as if for the first time, in the sunset opposite [. . .]. No place seems more lusty and alive than this platform of ancient dead stone. The fat Maidens who bear the weight of the Erechtheum on their heads, stand smiling tranquil ease, for their burden is just meet for their strength. They glory in it; one foot just advanced, their hands, one conceives, loosely curled at their sides. And the warm blue sky flows into all the crevices of the marble; yet they detach themselves, & spring in to the air, with crisp edges, unblunted, & still virile & young. (Woolf, A Passionate Apprentice 323) Woolf s description of the caryatids9 echoes Claras portrayal in Jacobs Room. In both cases, the womens bodies do not merely reflect the colors of the envi- ronment but they become organic extensions of the natural surroundings. Color and form, as Merleau-Ponty observed in his writings on Paul Czanne, should This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:47 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 160 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 not fulfill distinctive roles in art; rather color becomes the precondition of shape, the element that unites object and background while at the same time allowing for the emergence of individual contours. Similarly, the individual lines of the Erechtheum statues are not blurred by the colors of the setting sun, but on the contrary, they begin to take shape and come to life under natures gentle touch. The warm blue sky flowing into the crevices of the marble is reminiscent of Czannes idea about the landscape think[ing] itself  in the subject, cited by Merleau-Ponty in his 1945 essay Czannes Doubt (17) and Phenomenology of Perception: I do not lay out in front of [the sky] an idea of blue that would give me its secret. Rather, I abandon myself to it, I plunge into this mystery, and it thinks itself in me (222). In Woolf s journal description of the caryatids, the blue hues slowly spread out in the white marble, redrawing the statues borders without annihilating their unique hallmarks. Woolf s careful attention rests on the womens subtle gestures: the slightly advanced feet and loosely curled hands. The female figures preserve their individuality, they detach themselves, and with crisp edges spring in to the air energetically. Woolf s sensual and playful language in her journal entry allows one to read the scene as a seduction narrative. She depicts the Parthenon as a lusty place, where the fat Maidens bear the weight of the portico while the blue sky flows into their hollows. The scene might be interpreted as an erotic union between caryatids and nature, a fusion that carries the potential of future life but simultaneously subverts reproductive stereotypes. The female statues are not passive and immobile carriers of their burden, but while solidly holding the weight of the Erechtheum on their heads, their energized bodies emanate a sense of freedom and virile power. Yet the sculptures lively description is imbued with a sense of vulnerability. The phrase loosely curled hands can be read as a euphemism for the actual absence of the caryatids arms that were destroyed through the centuries (Warner, Eternal Greece 678). Furthermore, though Woolf did not mention it in her diary, she must have been aware of the statues lack of not only upper limbs but also noses. The original caryatids, of which Woolf probably took a close view in the Acropolis Museum, are famous for their flat noses, or more precisely, for faces with a rubbed surface where noses originally were. In Jacobs Room, the goddess holding the roof on her head reminds Jacob of Sandra. Remembering her pro- duces an unexpected effect on the young man: He was extraordinarily moved, and with the battered Greek nose in his head, with Sandra in his head, with all sorts of things in his head, off he started to walk right up to the top of Mount Hymettus [. . .] (133). Jacobs association of the caryatids with Sandra allows for multiple interpre- tations. The fact that he remembers Sandra as battered, indicates his perception of the woman as a vulnerable human being, in need of his (male) protection. This reading, however, might be at odds with how Sandra is portrayed throughout the novel. Jacobs last lover, after all, does not seem to be a very fragile woman: she exerts control over her husband and enjoys a great sense of liberty in her This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:47 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms Malleable Sculptures in Jacobs Room and Woolfs Travel Diaries 161 marriage. Hence, the adjective battered might rather be attached to Jacobs persona, suggesting that he is projecting his own frailty and insecurity caused by his turbulent feelings for the woman. Reading Jacobs visit to the Acropolis alongside Woolf s diary entry, nevertheless, provides a more complex explanation for Sandras depiction as a caryatid. The link between Sandra and the caryatids operates at a yet deeper level than a common physical trait. The promiscuous fat Maidens, bearing their weight with a tranquil ease foreshadow the secret erotic encounter between Jacob and Sandra, which importantly takes place on the Acropolis and results in Sandras pregnancy. In order to protect him from being shocked, Sandra decides not to tell Jacob that he has a son (JR 149). Yet, even though Jacob never finds out the truth, the little boy to whom Sandra gives birth becomes a flesh-and-blood monu- ment, the live bond between past and future, death and life, ruin and regeneration. The child, emphatically waving his hands in the perambulator (149), embodies the hard and durable (141), which Jacob longs for as he wakes up in the morning after his clandestine liaison with Sandra. The memory of the couples lovemaking is eternally stamped into the landscape, surrounded by the robust columns and the Temple that remain, but at the same time imbued with the soft emotion of the living which breaks fresh on them year after year (141). Despite the ephem- erality of the lovers relationship, Sandra succeeds in preserving Jacobs memory by creating a monument out of her own flesh, which while simultaneously durable and doomed to decay, has the power to bring back that moment in the dark on the road to the Acropolis which mattered for ever (149). Sandras memory-preserving activity, nevertheless, can be traced back to an earlier point in the narrative. Prior to conceiving their son, Sandra and Jacob visit the museum at Olympia, where the woman tries to get Jacobs head exactly on a level with the head of the Hermes of Praxiteles, but as the narrator emphasizes: before she could say a single word he had gone out of the Museum and left her (JR 127). Indeed, as Adam Parkes observes, Jacob defeats Sandra Williamss attempt to fix him, as if he himself were a statue, with her museumgoers stare (169). While I agree with this point, I think that Woolf does more than simply criticize Sandras egoism, as Parkes suggests (169). Hermes of Praxiteles, the statue with which Sandra associates Jacob, is the figure of a god holding the baby Dionysus in his left arm. In her attempt to get Jacobs head, Sandra does not simply want to fix the man; she unconsciously wishes to capture a touching but non-existent future image: Jacob with their still unborn son in his arms. The baby Dionysus, a small version of Jacob thus encapsulates Sandras effort to preserve her beloveds memory in the fragile, soft flesh of their child. Gabrielle McIntire argues that in Woolf continuity with anteriority man- ifests itself as a wish to touch the past through (re)discovering the history of physical and corporeal traces whose enigmatic imprints remain legible into the future (212). In Jacobs Room, Sandra represents the embodiment of this conti- nuity with anteriority. The caryatids ambiguous relationship with time has also been observed by Greek scholars such as Rex Warner, who notes in Views of Attica This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:47 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 162 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 and its Surroundings (1950) that the female statues on the Erechteum, instead of simply evoking historical events, reach both forwards and backwards in time (50). Sandra, the caryatid standing on the remnants of the past, becomes the guardian of memory, while her vigorous body stretches upward, opening into the endless sky and bearing the possibilities of the future. When Woolf stated in her letter to Strachey that she wanted to break with complete representation and (partially) follow in the footsteps of her Great Aunts, she articulated a simultaneous departure from and embracing of the lit- erary past. While she rejected her Edwardian predecessors exhaustively detailed portraits, she also gave voice to her commitment to a certain strain of female literary tradition, characterized by incompleteness and brokenness. Woolf showed a sensitivity toward unfinished statues well before she even started to think about Jacobs Room. During her visit to the Greek town Eleusis in September 1906 she was enchanted by the delicate fragments in the museum: [t]here is for example a noble victory, headless, wingless & armless: still her draperies & her fair body are enough to stamp once more that supreme Greek image on ones [sic] mind (A Passionate Apprentice 324). The delicate fragments, where delicate means soft, fragile, and precious at the same time, offer a far more fulfilling artistic experience than a perfectly polished piece of art. In a letter to Gerald Brenan on Christmas Day 1922, Woolf articulates her disbelief in wholeness when describing human beings. She emphasizes the impossibility of seeing the human soul as a whole; instead all we can do is to catch a glimpse of a nose, a shoulder, something turn- ing away, always in movement (Letters II 598). Yet, Woolf seems to prefer this state of fragmentariness: Still, it seems better to me to catch this glimpse, than to sit down with Hugh Walpole, [H.G.] Wells, etc. etc. and make large oil paintings of fabulous fleshy monsters complete from top to toe (598). According to Woolf, a battered nose or a sensually lifted foot offers a more complex and durable insight into anothers being than a minutely detailed close-up, which transforms humans into grotesque, monster-like figures, impenetrable by the viewers sympathetic eyes. The truncated figure of the victory (identified as Nike, the Greek goddess of glory) represents for Woolf an exquisite aesthetic pleasure and creates a lasting impression, an indelible image on the mind.10 Woolf describes her immersion in Greek statuary as a complex sensory entanglement, which involves not only sight but touch too. Her first encounter with the sculpture of Hermes is depicted as a form of visceral delight. She depicts the stone as acquiescent to the sculptors [sic] hand: it is almost liquid, of the colours of alabaster, & of the solidity of marble. There is a beautiful polished foot which you may stroke with your own soft flesh. (A Pas- sionate Apprentice 319) The sight of Hermes triggers a strong sense of excitement, experienced in the viewers body yet transcending corporeal limits: the eyes almost become independent creatures that attach themselves to the statue, freely springing in the hollows of the marble. At the same time, springing echoes an earlier passage in the diary, in which Woolf describes Hermes as having a spring in his step (319). This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:47 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms Malleable Sculptures in Jacobs Room and Woolfs Travel Diaries 163 Furthermore, the stone, a combination of softness and hardness, transforms into living material, inviting the spectators searching gaze and touch. Seeing proves to be insufficient in front of such beauty, which can truly be grasped only via tactile perception: the caressing of the marble foot with your own soft flesh. Employing the same words to depict both sculpture and viewer momentarily suspends the borders between the two, allowing one to see the contemplating subject as the extension of the art object. The marble statue comes to life while the living human subject is petrified by the sculptures ineffable beauty. Woolf drew the figure of the art lover as someone who does not, to borrow Merleau-Pontys words, look at a thing, fixing it in its place but lets his/her gaze wander in the halos of Being (Eye and Mind 126). After all, intimacy is born in hollows, in those breathing spaces where, returning to Ratcliffes words, time stops in order to allow us to make physical contact with the statue. In a similar vein, affective literary criticism happens at the intersection of historical approach and personal, bodily encounter with art objects. This methodology results in a form of firmly soft criticism that allows space and time for our subjective response to art, without questioning the importance of academic rigor. The trouble with feeling now, which Ratcliffe identified in our lack of bodily-affective contact with art objects, is perhaps not so much a contemporary problem but one dating back to earlier times. Writers of the early twentieth cen- tury show a deep concern with humans alienation from the living and feeling body in interpersonal relationships as well as in artistic experiences. By portraying corporeality in its firmly soft materiality, Woolf offers an alternative interpretation of the body, which she viewed as malleable matter, yielding to the artists fingers, without losing its own borders. Through her frequent references to statues in Jacobs Room and her Greece diaries, Woolf suggests that semi-soft and rough bodies might prove to become longer-lasting monuments than their exquisitely chiseled, solid counterparts. The female characters effort to keep Jacobs mem- ory live testifies to a strikingly different creative method than that employed by the unsympathetic male minds of the British Museum. Woolf s response to caryatids and other Greek statues encapsulates Ratcliffes idea of the importance of emotional-bodily encounter with art objects. Only this kind of contact results in genuine intimate touch with other bodies, which do not represent mere blocks of stone from a bygone era but are acquiescent to the approaching hand, letting themselves be stroke[d] [by] your own soft flesh. Woolf s literary aesthetics might be closer, after all, to the soft flesh than we have imagined. Notes 1. When discussing Woolf s fiction in the light of Merleau-Pontys philosophy, critics usually look at the two writers works from an ecophenomenological perspective. In her article Virginia Woolf and the Flesh of the World (1999), Louise Westling elaborates on the ways in which Merleau-Pontys phenomenology illuminates Woolf s preoccupation with the forces of the universe. In Ecocriticism in the Modernist Imagination (2016), Kelly E. Sultzbach investigates how, in Woolf s works, This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:47 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 164 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 ideas of wholeness are shaped by the complex relationship between the human and non- human (82144). Ariane Mildenberg slightly departs from a strictly ecophenomenological approach by reading Woolf s The Waves (1931) and Paul Czannes The Large Bathers (1906) through the lens of Merleau-Pontys philosophy of interrelatedness (Modernism and Phenomenology 121127). 2. Examples of recently published monographs in the field of modernism and emotion include: Julie Taylors Djuna Barnes and Affective Modernism (2012), Kirsty Martins Modernism and the Rhythms of Sympathy (2013), Rachel Greenwald Smiths Affect and American Literature in the Age of Neoliberalism (2015), Charlotta P. Einarssons A Theatre of Affect: The Corporeal Turn in Samuel Becketts Drama (2017), and Marta Figlerowiczs Spaces of Feeling: Affect and Awareness in Modernist Literature (2017). 3. The difference between the physical (Krper) and lived body (Leib), though often attributed to Merleau-Ponty, can be traced back to earlier sources, such as the works of Helmuth Plessner and Max Scheler. See Hans-Peter Krgers Persons and Their Bodies (2010). 4. The similarity of the two phrases has also been noticed by Sue Roe; see Jacobs Room, note 16 in chapter XII. 5. In Phenomenology of Perception, Merleau-Ponty describes the subjects communion with the world as an act of mutual interaction: I am, as a sensing subject, full of natural powers of which I am the first to be filled with wonder. Thus I am not, to recall Hegels phrase, a hole in being, but rather a hollow, or a fold that was made and that can be unmade (223). 6. In her essay On Being Ill (1926), Woolf uses the image of glass to reject interpretations of the self as a purely immaterial entity: the body is not a sheet of plain glass through which the soul looks straight and clear. Instead, the soul can only gaze through the panesmudged or rosy; it cannot separate off from the body like the sheath of a knife or the pod of a pea for a single instant (Essays IV 3178). 7. In The Visible and the Invisible, Merleau-Ponty defines flesh (chair) as neither matter, nor mind or substance but an element of Being: To designate [the flesh], we should need the old term element, in the sense it was used to speak of water, air, earth, and fire, that is, in the sense of a general thing, [. . .] a sort of incarnate principle that brings a style of being wherever there is a fragment of being. [. . .The flesh is] [n]ot a fact or a sum of facts, and yet adherent to location and to the now (139140). 8. While working on To the Lighthouse, Woolf writes in her diary on 21 March 1927: Dear me, how lovely some parts of To the Lighthouse are! Soft & pliable, & I think deep, & never a word wrong for a page at a time (Diary III 132). Note how Woolf uses adjectives related to tangibility to describe her novel. 9. Caryatids are female statues used as pillars to support the roof of a Greek temple. For further information and images see Warner, Eternal Greece 5468. 10. See footnote 22 in section Greece 1906 in A Passionate Apprentice: In the room with the colossal Roman caryatids from the lesser Prophylea is a headless Nike. (324) Works Cited Cuda, Anthony. The Passions of Modernism: Eliot, Yeats, Woolf, and Man. U of South Carolina P, 2010. Dickey, Colin. Virginia Woolf and Photography. Edinburgh Companion to Virginia Woolf and the Arts, edited by Maggie Humm. Edinburgh UP, 2010, pp. 375391. Gross, Kenneth. The Dream of the Moving Statue. Cornell UP, 1992. Kohlmann, Benjamin. Awkward Moments: Melodrama, Modernism, and the Politics of Affect. PMLA, vol. 128, no. 2, 2013, pp. 337352. Koulouris, Theodore. Hellenism and Loss in the Work of Virginia Woolf. Ashgate, 2011. This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:47 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms Malleable Sculptures in Jacobs Room and Woolfs Travel Diaries 165 Krger, Hans-Peter. Persons and Their Bodies: The Krper/Leib Distinction and Helmuth Plessners Theories of Excentric Positionality and Homo absconditus. The Journal of Speculative Philosophy, vol. 24, no. 3, 2010, pp. 256274. Lee, Hermione. Virginia Woolf. Vintage, 1997. Majumdar, Robin, and Allen McLaurin, editors. Virginia Woolf: The Critical Heritage. Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1975. Martin, Kirsty. Modernism and the Rhythms of Sympathy: Vernon Lee, Virginia Woolf, D.H. Lawrence. Oxford UP, 2013. McIntire, Gabrielle. Modernism, Memory, and Desire: T.S. Eliot and Virginia Woolf. Cambridge UP, 2008. Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. Czannes Doubt. 1945. The Merleau-Ponty Aesthetics Reader: Philosophy and Painting, edited and with an introduction by Galen A. Johnson. Northwestern UP, 1993, pp. 5975. . Eye and Mind. 1960. The Merleau-Ponty Aesthetics Reader: Philosophy and Painting, edited and with an introduction by Galen A. Johnson. Northwestern UP, 1993, pp. 121149. . Phenomenology of Perception. 1945. Translated by Donald A. Landes. Routledge, 2012. . The Visible and the Invisible. 1964. Translated by Lingis A. Evanston. Northwestern UP, 1968. Mildenberg, Ariane. Modernism and Phenomenology: Literature, Philosophy, Art. Palgrave Macmillan, 2017. Neverow, Vara. Desiring Statues and Ambiguous Sexualities in Jacobs Room. Interdisciplinary/ Multidisciplinary Woolf, edited by Ann Martin and Kathryn Holland. Liverpool UP, 2013, pp. 2734. Parkes, Adam. A Sense of Shock: The Impact of Impressionism on Modern British and Irish Writing. Oxford UP, 2011. Pound, Ezra. Preface to Some Imagist Poets. 1915. Modernism: An Anthology of Sources and Documents, edited by Vassiliki Kolocotroni, Jane Goldman, and Olga Taxidou. Edinburgh UP, 1998, pp. 268269. Raitt, Suzanne. Virginia Woolf s Early Novels: Finding a Voice. The Cambridge Companion to Virginia Woolf, edited by Susan Sellers. Cambridge UP, 2010, pp. 2848. Ratcliffe, Sophie. The Trouble with Feeling Now: Thomas Woolner, Robert Browning, and the Touching Case of Constance and Arthur. 19: Interdisciplinary Studies in the Long Nineteenth Century, issue 23, 2016, pp. 124. Sultzbach, Kelly. Ecocriticism in the Modernist Imagination: Forster, Woolf, and Auden. Cambridge UP, 2016. Taylor, Julie. Djuna Barnes and Affective Modernism. Edinburgh UP, 2012. . Introduction. Modernism and Affect, edited by Julie Taylor. Edinburgh UP, 2015. Vasseleu, Cathryn. Textures of Light: Vision and Touch in Irigaray, Levinas and Merleau-Ponty. Routledge, 1998. Wall, Kathleen. Significant Form in Jacobs Room: Ekphrasis and the Elegy. Texas Studies in Literature and Language, vol. 44, no. 3, 2002, pp. 302323. Warner, Rex. Eternal Greece. Thames and Hudson, 1953. . Views of Attica and its Surroundings. Lehmann, 1950. Westling, Louise. Virginia Woolf and the Flesh of the World. New Literary History, vol. 30, no. 4, 1999, pp. 855875. Woolf, Virginia. The Diary of Virginia Woolf. Edited by Anne Olivier Bell. Hogarth, 197784. 5 vols. This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:47 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 166 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 . The Essays of Virginia Woolf. Edited by Andrew McNeillie and Stuart N. Clarke. Hogarth, 19862011. 6 vols. . Jacobs Room. 1922. Annotated and with an introduction by Sue Roe. Penguin, 1992. . The Letters of Virginia Woolf. Edited by Nigel Nicholson and Joanne Trautmann. Hogarth, 197580. 6 vols. . A Passionate Apprentice: The Early Journals, 18971909. Edited by Mitchell A. Leaska. Hogarth, 1990. . A Room of Ones Own. 1929. Penguin, 2000. This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:47 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms