Kinesthetic Empathy, Physical Recoil: The Conflicting Embodied Affects of Samuel Beckett's <em>Quad</em> Kinesthetic Empathy, Physical Recoil: The Conflicting Embodied Affects of Samuel Beckett's Quad Author(s): Hannah Simpson Source: Journal of Modern Literature , Vol. 42, No. 2, Varieties of Embodiment: Whose Body? (Winter 2019), pp. 132-148 Published by: Indiana University Press Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2979/jmodelite.42.2.08 JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at https://about.jstor.org/terms Indiana University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of Modern Literature This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:48 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2979/jmodelite.42.2.08 Journal of Modern Literature Vol. 42, No. 2  Copyright  The Trustees of Indiana University  DOI 10.2979/jmodelite.42.2.08 Kinesthetic Empathy, Physical Recoil: The Conflicting Embodied Affects of Samuel Becketts Quad Hannah Simpson University of Oxford Exploring audience responses to Samuel Becketts Quad (1981) reveals the plays tendency to evoke intense but contradictory embodied affects for its spectator. Audience members recurrently testify to experiencing a heightened kinesthetic empathy that catalyzes their sense of identification with the onstage figures. However, they also repeatedly record a simultaneous impulse to recoil from the performers, a sense of revulsion or the refusal of immersive engagement with their moving bodies. A hybrid methodological framework of kinesthetic empathy and disability theory offers a means of better exploring both the generation and the consequence of Quads conflicting embodied affects. This framework emphasizes Quads foregrounding of its performers embodiment, and permits a con- sequently clearer recognition of Quads value as a performance that demands that its spectator confront the physical fact of others bodily existencewhile acknowledging the difficulty of such engagement. Keywords: Samuel Beckett / Quad / kinesthetic empathy / disability theory / affect Although first published by Faber and Faber as Quad in 1984, Samuel Becketts wordless play was originally introduced to the public as Quadrat I and Quadrat II in a recorded performance by members of the Stuttgart Preparatory Ballet School. The performance was first broadcast in Germany in October 1981 by the Sddeutscher Rundfunk television network, and then in Great Britain by BBC Two in December 1982. In both Quadrat I and II, four Hannah Simpson (hannah.simpson@stx.ox.ac.uk) is a DPhil candidate in English literature at the University of Oxford. Her dissertation explores the presentation of phys- ical pain and disability in post-World War II Francophone theatre, with a particular focus on Samuel Becketts early plays. She is also the theatre review editor for The Beckett Circle. This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:48 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms mailto:hannah.simpson@stx.ox.ac.uk The Conflicting Embodied Affects of Becketts Quad 133 physically similar figures enter the quadrangle space one by one, each beginning at a different corner. Each figure walks along one side of the quadrangle and then along the touching diagonal towards its center. Whenever any figure comes to the middle of the quadrangle where the diagonal paths cross, each sharply swerves around the central danger zone in order to avoid colliding with each other (Beckett, Complete Works 453). Following this sharp swerve, each figure makes a ninety-degree counterclockwise turn and repeats the same path, which now takes them away from the center, back around the quads periphery. In Quadrat I, the figures are dressed in red, blue, yellow, and white djellabas, and each performers walk is accompanied by a different musical instrument. In Quadrat II, the same movement is performed at half the original pace, with a metronome replacing the percussion instrument accompaniment. In what follows, I investigate Quad s tendency to evoke intense but contra- dictory embodied affects for its spectator. Audience reaction to Quad frequently testifies to a particularly visceral and discomfited spectatorial response to the pre- cisely controlled movement of its four performers. Quad s staging of an ambiguous confrontation-and-evasion movement is mirrored in the audiences own confused feelings of empathy and repulsion; its spectators, we will see, recurrently attest to confused feelings both of identification and of revulsion, mesmerized fascination and nervous recoil, or what Laura Salisbury eloquently terms wrinkles in the affective experience of an observer (212). Quad engages its audience members in empathetic identification with the moving bodies in performance, and simulta- neously generates a resistance to such identification, creating a tension between immersion and alienation in the spectator. As a result of this unsettling affect generated by the embodied nature of the television or theatrical performance, Quad s spectators frequently find themselves resisting immersion in or identi- fication with the movement before them, inhabiting a midway point between recognition and revulsion, empathy and recoil, in confrontation with Quad s material moving bodies. Quad has frequently been recognized as one of Becketts most distinctly dance-like pieces (Starte 199), a piece of contemporary dance staged for the cam- era (Bignell 43), given the precisely choreographed movement of its performers and its rejection of any verbal component in favor of a focus on bodily movement. Becketts note Some ballet training desirable in his description of his preferred cast (Complete Works 453) and his hiring of ballet students from the Stuttgart Pre- paratory Ballet School for the performances 1981 filming add additional weight to a reading of Quad that prioritizes its staging of bodily movement. However, while many scholars note in passing Quad s dance-like focus on corporeal choreography, this recognition tends to remain a brief introductory parenthesis in works that move on almost immediately to extra-bodily ideas. Academic engagement with Quad has been dominated by focus on the technological capacities of the television medium, as by Linda Ben-Zvi (2006), Eckart Voigts-Virchow (2000), Elizabeth Klaver (1991), and Enoch Brater (1985), and by interrogations of its mathemati- cal particularities, as by Baylee Brits (2017), Conor Houghton (2013), and Piotr This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:48 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 134 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 Woycicki (2012).1 While these approaches have generated productive insights, the field currently lacks sustained scholarly engagement with the devastatingly physical elements of Quad s performance (Homan 155). This lack of engagement not only signals a gap in current academic under- standing of Quad specifically, but also indicates a broader breakdown in the application of performance studies methodology to texts that more traditionally fall within the remit of literary scholarship (a category that includes many of Becketts later television and theatre works) in which the focus on the bodily movement of its performers demands a sensory mode of perception on the part of the listener/viewer that is materially different from the act of reading, as performance scholar Anna McMullan describes Quad (1). A failure to draw on the critical language and conceptual frameworks that performance studies uses to speak about the functioning of the human body in performance is one of the reasons, I suggest, for the widespread critical confusion faced with Quad. Beck- etts bewildering stage piece, as The Telegraph critic Tim Martin calls it (par. 14), one of the most puzzling pieces of work by Samuel Beckett (Schmid 263), remains perplexing only while we lack the critical capacity to interrogate the range of affect produced by its moving bodies. S.E. Gontarski notes specifically the difficulty encountered by those who try to speak about Becketts television plays and especially Quad without access to the productions. On the page, without the iconic, ideogrammatic counterpart, the works are unreadable in any traditional literary sense (88). For all its fascinating mathematical permutations in textual form, Quad becomes Quad only in performance, embodied in human physical- ity; as Elizabeth Klaver observes, the script is only a pre-text, for the television performance constitutes the text (375). In contrast to the written mediation of the body that typifies prose and poetry, the media of embodied dramatic perfor- mance generates affect in being physically embodied by the human performer, necessitating the spectators confrontation with the living, moving human body in what McMullan terms an intercorporeal network that draws attention to the perceptual and corporeal experience not only of the actors/personae but also of the spectator (13). Consequently, scholarly approaches that fail to engage with the sensory and emotional affect of the confrontation with the human body in television and theatrical performance risk overlooking a crucial element of Quad s functioning. Accordingly, in order to investigate the moments in which audience members find themselves both mesmerized and repulsed by Quad s moving bodies, I move away from the script analysis, television theory, and application of mathematical concepts that have typified earlier scholarly approaches to the play. Instead, I turn to recorded audience responses to performances of Quad drawn from professional and amateur reviews and from academic testimony, and employ a hybrid meth- odological framework drawn from disability theory and kinesthetic empathy to interrogate these responses. Kinesthetic empathy, the spectators bodily response to an observed objects physical existence or bodily movement, offers a model for understanding the audience members embodied response to the physicality of This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:48 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms The Conflicting Embodied Affects of Becketts Quad 135 Quad s performing bodies. By contrast, disability theorys focus on the common ableist rejection of the unfamiliarly or upsettingly moving body, as demonstrated by the work of Lennard J. Davis, Rosemarie Garland-Thomson, and Tobin Sie- bers, offers a counterpointed but complementary framework for exploring specta- torial recoil from bodies that move in an unfamiliar manner. By countering what Beckett scholar Steven Connor calls the difficulty of discussing non-verbal action in words (181), and returning focus squarely to the embodied materiality of the human figure in performance, this hybrid framework will allow us to explore the value in how Quad both engages and limits the audience members sense of identification or union with the plays moving bodies. kInESThETIc EmpaThy and dISaBIlITy ThEory According to the modern definition provided by H. Charlton Bastian, kinesthe- sia (often used interchangeably with the term proprioception) is the synthesis of information regarding the bodys position, motion, and orientation provided by the sense organs (543). Empathy in its modern sense, as defined by Robert Vischer and Theodore Lipps, refers not merely to a capacity for fellow-feeling but rather the ability to move into and feel anything in the observable world (Foster 154), the process of projecting oneself into the object of contemplation (Reynolds and Reason, Introduction 19). The related term kinesthetic empathy, then, denotes the specifically physiological variant of empathy, the spectators physical reaction to the contemplated objects physical being, experienced as an automatic, unwilled, physiological response in contrast to an active process of imagination. The dance critic John Martin, an early proponent of kinesthetic empathy as a model for under- standing the embodied affect generated by performance media, identified this effect as the inherent contagion of bodily movement, which makes the onlooker feel sympathetically in his own musculature the exertions he sees in someone elses musculature (Dance 105). More recent work on kinesthetic empathy has criticized the incorrect biological assumptions that formed the basis of Martins understand- ing of the process, but retains the idea of the contagion of bodily movement. Two closely related models, motor mimicry and neural mimicry, have been advanced to explain this phenomenon. Motor mimicry involves the observer unconsciously adopting the posture and/or facial expressions of the observed sufferer (Dimberg, Thunberg, and Elmehed, 2000). The neural mimicry model contends that perception and action rely on the same neural circuits, and so both produce similar experiences (Preston and de Waal, 2002). This matched neural processing does not necessarily produce visible matched motor activity, but both the motor and neural mimicry models cite a motor resonance between observer and observed, and consequently a matched internal state between the two. Current kinesthetic empathy work, especially that focused on the neural mimicry model, has drawn legitimacy from neurosciences inquiry into mirror neurons. In the 1990s, Vittorio Gallese et al. recognized mirror neurons as part of the neurological system that explains the already-observed phenomenon of This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:48 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 136 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 movements contagious nature (Gallese et al., 1996; Gallese, 2000; Gallese, 2001). The brains mirror neurons fire in the same manner both when the individual performs a certain action and when the individual witnesses that action being performed. Consequently, the observer receives the sense that she is actively par- ticipating in [the observed motion] and directly experiencing both its movements and their associated emotion (Reason and Reynolds, Related Pleasures 54). An understanding of kinesthetic empathy, then, permits a new angle from which to explore spectator response to the movement of Quad: the audiences visceral experience of the perceived movement, and their potential close identification with the performers bodily experience. However, the kinesthetic empathy stimulated by bodily performance is often invoked as a model of harmonious union between individuals, a catalyst to a total empathetic identification that erases all felt distinction between individuals. As such, it is inadequate by itself as framework for exploring Quad, which appears to resist the audiences empathetic identification as much as or even more than it elicits it. Dee Reynolds, for example, argues that the experience of kines- thetic empathy between performer and audience means that the spectator can be invested as both subject and object in a shared materiality (129). Kinesthetic empathy, she declares, does not take as its object a perceived other, but rather a liminal association of both beings which is neither self  nor other (129) and which allows the spectator access to the very materiality of the performers existence and performance (123). This extreme feeling of physical union, while relevant to many other expe- riences of performance spectatorship, is an incomplete summary of the effect of Quad, which presents a defamiliarized body to the audience, a body from which spectators frequently recoil. As we will later explore in more detail, audi- ence members admit struggling to recognize Quad s bodies as mutually human, and even to resisting what they find to be a distressing rather than a satisfying kinesthetic immersion in Quad s bodily movement, an involuntary breach of individual separateness (Langer 129). Quad thus demands that we consider not only how embodied performance stimulates the spectators own bodily reaction in response to the moving body before them, but also when and why the spectator might resist this feeling of kinesthetic empathy with another body, refusing to feel along with another human being. Against this model of intense simultaneous identification with anothers bodily experience, recent disability theory offers a close examination of the resis- tance to empathy or identification with anothers embodied experience. Disabil- ities studies emphasize how, as Rosemarie Garland-Thomson puts it, varying degrees of disability or able-bodiedness are determined by how far bodies conform to social expectations [. . .] the meanings attributed to extraordinary bodies reside not in inherent physical flaws, but in social relationships in which one group is legitimated by possessing valued physical characteristics [. . .] [and] by systematically imposing the role of cultural or corporeal inferiority on others. (7) This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:48 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms The Conflicting Embodied Affects of Becketts Quad 137 Tobin Siebers calls this phenomenon, in which narrow social expectation determines how the human body should and shouldnt function, the ideology of ability. It is at its simplest the preference for able-bodiedness, and at its most radical defines the baseline by which humanness is determined (Complex Embodiment 279). Seminal work in the field of disability theory has repeat- edly located fear and consequent recoil as the operating factors of the ideology of ability, underlining the recurrent link between the perception of physical disability and the rejection of that body, the refusal to recognize the differently functioning individual as mutually human. The ideology of ability makes us fear disability, Siebers observes (Complex Embodiment 279), by setting up what Lennard J. Davis calls the nightmare of the body that is deformed, maimed, mutilated, broken (5). Davis cites horror, fear, avoidance and strong feelings of repulsion as likely responses to such a body (12), from which the self-declared able-bodied individual retreats. The body perceived as disabled, which does not fit these categories, is resisted by the able-bodied, who refuse empathy or identi- fication with it for fear of aligning themselves with it. Crucially for our analysis of Quad, what constitutes incorrect physical func- tioning remains socially determined, and can equate to the refusal to recognize as mutually human that body that is interpreted as excessively, inhumanly able rather than impaired. Garland-Thomsons study of the freak show demonstrates how the disabling gaze of the spectator can turn on the over- as well as the under-performing body, reading perceived physical excess as well as perceived physical deficiency as inhumanly Other: the bearded woman alongside the dwarf, the conjoined twin alongside the amputee (17). Any bodily experience perceived as unfamiliar or undesirable to the normate observer can be rejected as Other by the resistant disabling gaze. Thus we will see Quad s dance-trained, hyper-controlled bodies persistently read as non-human by the plays spectators. Quad, Salisbury observes, does not simply gather up the viewer into tran- scendent, annihilating ecstasy or drop them into a disinterested shrug, but instead inaugurates distinctively uncertain affects (212) that generate complex mate- rialisations of sensations of self-coincidence and alterity (214). A combined framework of kinesthetic empathy and disability theory thus offers a useful model through which to read the odd mixture of immersion and resistance so frequently reported by Quad s spectators. Both fields are concerned with an onlookers response to another human body, focusing respectively on the felt sense of phys- ical communion and on the resistance to identifying with another human body. Bringing information and theories from both fields together to bear on staged performance offers a productive new perspective on Quad s affective functioning. QuAd: gEnEraTIng conTradIcTory affEcTS Audience response recorded across commercial and amateur reviews and aca- demic engagement suggests that Quad generates conflicting affects throughout its performance. While the change from Quadrat I to Quadrat IIfrom color to This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:48 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 138 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 monochrome, percussion instrument to metronome, and to a half-speed tempo most predictably produces a shift in audience feeling, most spectators also report often radically changing affective responses even throughout the individual halves of Quad. Anecdotal evidence gathered from both scholarly engagement and commercial theatre criticism indicates a general movement from relatively neutral curiosity to hypnotized fascination as the sense of a choreographic pattern begins to emerge to an increasingly distressed discomfort as the performance continues seemingly endlessly. However, Quad s lack of narrative or dialogue makes it difficult to link the reported changes in affect firmly to any precise stimulus in the performance itself beyond a more idiosyncratically developing spectator response to its mov- ing bodies, and I do not claim to lay out a map of changing affect as experienced in the same way by every spectator over every instantiation of Quad. Rather, I am interested in how the play generates both fascinated immersion and resistant recoil in spectators in ways that do not seem directly or predictably linked to any precise scripted moment of narrative, dialogue, or even radically changing movement, Both Quad s televisual and theatrical spectators testify recurrently to the manner in which the plays choreography can produce an intense level of physically and psychically felt absorption at moments during its performance. Tellingly, variations of the word mesmerizing recur throughout variously situated audi- ence members reflections on the performance. Amateur reviewer Emily Aherne confessed herself mesmerized by her first viewing of the 1981 Sddeutscher Rundfunk recording (par. 3), performance scholar Piotr Woycicki called it mes- merising and simply beautiful (155), and theatre critic Frances Winston declared Pan Pans 2014 performance completely mesmerising (par. 7). More specifically, Beckett scholar Andrew Gibson likewise praises the Sddeutscher Rundfunk performances mesmerising, addictive rhythms (238), and this focus on specifi- cally the rhythm of the performers movements and the accompanying percussion as being particularly mesmerising indicates the significance of the repetitively measured movement of Quad s figures in generating the spectators kinesthetic immersion. Dominic Symonds and Millie Taylors work on musical theatre, draw- ing on an understanding of kinesthetic empathy, emphasize how corporeally overwhelming the performance of rhythmic bodily movement can become (161), reminding us that the power of gestures like music and dance [. . .] can overwhelm audiences with the rhythms and emotions of enchantment: we are immersed in the observation of choreographed gesture which begins to invade our bodies physically (163, 211). While not often considered a musical theatre text, Quad likewise foregrounds reiterated bodily movements set to a measured tempo, thus heightening the effect of the spectators kinesthetic empathy into something mesmerizing. Intriguingly, the word mesmerizing that Quad s spectators use so often to describe the plays effect finds its roots in mesmer- ism, a term created by German doctor Franz Mesmer in the eighteenth century This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:48 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms The Conflicting Embodied Affects of Becketts Quad 139 to denote what he also dubbed animal magnetism, the energy transference between animate beings: the efforts which the bodies make towards each other produce animal electricity, which in fact is no more than the effect produced between two bodies, one of which has more motion than the other; a phenomenon ferving to prove that the body which has moft motion communicates it to the other. (Wonders and mysteries 12) While Mesmers concept of the body organically producing transferable electricity would quickly be disproven, his recognition of the physically felt effect of one body in motion on another body at rest bears parallels to modern neurosciences discovery of the mirror neurons effect. It is a remarkable quirk of language development that Quad s spectators so regularly describe the play in performance as mesmerizing, thus speaking indirectly to an earlier version of the very same physical process of response. Linda Ben-Zvi has convincingly traced how the televisual medium has a heightened power to involve viewers directly in comparison to other media (478), and is employed to create intimacy within Becketts works (482). Although Ben-Zvi leaves Quad out of her analysis of Becketts television plays, her interroga- tion of how the medium can generate a stronger immersive spectatorial response remains helpful for thinking about Quad s effect in its 1981 recorded version. Ben-Zvi cites Marshall McLuhans observation that the relatively low-density, blurred images of television (478)in comparison with the typically sharper definition and higher resolution of the film imagedemand a greater concen- tration and interpretative effort from the viewer, and so become more intimate and moving by dint of this heightened engagement (480). The partial obscuring of the human body via the televisual media works to render the body itself more absorbing for the spectator, runs Ben-Zvis argument. That is, the more the spec- tator is required to labor to make out the on-screen image, the more immersed she finds herself becoming in what she observes, to forge a deeper, more direct relationship with it (477) and thus to end up feeling what the figure is feeling (482). Although neither McLuhan nor Ben-Zvi mention Quad specifically, the 1981 recordings darkened screen and high camera angle, in tandem with the com- plex pattern of the choreographed movement and the cloaking of the performers bodies in their djellabas, certainly demand a heightened spectatorial attention. Ben-Zvi also notes how the reception format of the televisual in the second half of the twentieth century, the small size of the screen and the intimacy of the receptionseen in rooms in private houses rather than in public spaces amongst strangers, did much to intensify spectatorial immersion in broadcast content (477). Today, nearly three decades after Quad s first recording, when so much television media is watched on the still smaller and more private laptop screen, this intimate absorptive effect is yet more marked. The manner in which the television medium can heighten audience immer- sion in the performers movements may go some way toward explaining Becketts reluctance to see Quad staged: Cant see Quad on the stage, he admitted to Alan This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:48 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 140 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 Schneider in 1981 (No Author 416), and I am dubious about yr. idea for staging Quad, he wrote to Jonah Salz in 1985 (Letters III 655). However, transferring the play into the theatrical medium does still offer a heightened potential for the spectators kinesthetic immersion, as demonstrated by audience response to the multiple theatrical stagings of the play.2 Crucially, a theatrical adaption of Quad retains the necessary confrontation with the physically rather than textually embodied moving figure in the same way that the televisual recording does, and that the prose or radio adaptation would not, immersing the spectator in a pro- longed contemplation of embodied movement that foregrounds the functions and psychosomatic charge of the body (McMullan 59). Quad s foregrounding of bodily movement allows the felt effect of kinesthetic empathy to resonate more intensely with the engaged spectator. There is no dialogue such as can be found even in Becketts other highly choreographic late plays like Footfalls (1976), and the accompanying or even incidental music of most dance performances is reduced to an atonal and monotonous percussion backing. As the spectators mirror neu- rons respond to the observed movement of Quad s figures, the spectators sense of being invested as both subject and object in a shared materiality and flow of choreographed moments (Reynolds 129) is heightened by the relative lack of any staged distraction away from Quad s moving bodies. However, alongside this kinesthetic immersion in the performers move- ments, Quad s spectators also evince more ambivalent responses to the play. Its not the kind of piece you would sit through several times, Winston observes delicately (par. 8). Even committed Beckett scholars have confessed their irrita- tion. Woycicki frankly acknowledges the possibility of Quad s constant circular repetition becoming annoying and tiresome to watch (144), while Enoch Brater underlines the plays relentless nature (53), and Brian Wall calls the ruthless performance something of an endurance test (93, 96). The repeated focus on the ruthlessly repetitive or relentless nature of Quad emphasizes how the very ele- ments of the performance that heighten the potential for kinesthetic absorption the precise, rhythmic, and repetitive movements of the performerseventually drive Quad s spectators to resist or reject that absorption. McMullan has previously noted how frequently Becketts theatre work pres- ents a series of confining situations where the body is subject to an implacable system (64), and how this choreographic control takes on suggestions of cruelty for the spectator, since the material which generates the series is the human body (61). This description is particularly appropriate to Quad, whose audience quickly becomes uncomfortably, even painfully aware of the extremely precise nature of the plays choreography. Of course, most staged performances entail some degree of controlled choreography, particularly much dance performance, but Quad both foregrounds this bodily control and renders it particularly dis- tressing, via the quick, seemingly panicked steps of Quadrat I and the exhausted, apparently resistant steps of Quadrat II. Any sense of onstage movement as the free, self-expressive act of the individual is firmly dispelled; as dance scholar Jose- phine Starte observes the subjugation of the performer [. . .] is accentuated rather This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:48 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms The Conflicting Embodied Affects of Becketts Quad 141 than obscured (199). Many spectators are discomfited by this extreme rigidity of bodily subjugation and resistant to the authoritarian control and surrender of agency it implies, the relentless and ruthless nature of the performance, as Brater and Wall put it respectively. Quad s hyper-controlled choreography also pushes the spectator to resist kinesthetic immersion by generating unease regarding the potential for accidental misstep or deliberate revolt by the performers. This sense that there is no margin whatsoever for improvisation or error is frequently cited by Quad s spectators as reason for their discomfort. Gibson observes the anxiety engendered for the spectator of Quad by that tiniest possibility that quadrated organization may break down, the fear that the figures may become entangled, graze each other, or collide, where there may be a mishap, where the structure may wobble or collapse, the process go wrong (238). Literary and dance scholar Susan Jones likewise notes how the original laughter often catalyzed in the spectator viewing Quad for the first time is frequently cut short as the tension increasingly builds toward terror as the figures continue their rotations around the quad (300). The smallest deviation from the prescribed choreography risks a bodily collision in the danger zone at the quadrangles central point (Beckett, Complete Works 453), affectively threatening the kinesthetically immersed spectator. The unbearable and unrelieved tension generated by the potential for error or collision is so unpleasant an experience for most spectators that it drives them to dissociate from the situation, resisting further absorption into the spectacle of movement before them (Fehsenfeld 361). Again, the very intensity of the kinesthetic empathy that Quad can generate in its spectators may drive them to resist this immersion, as the performance becomes increasingly distressing. This recoil from the observed bodily experience that we do not wish to share underlies Sieberss, Daviss, and Garland-Thomsons explanations of the common shrinking away from the physically impaired or divergent body that they observe beyond the theatrical medium. Quad embodies this recoil from the undesirable bodily experience both in performance and in audience response. Spectators have recurrently cited fear as the extreme end of their resistant response to Quad. Brater called the play frightening (53) and Chris Ackerley admitted to finding it chilling (153) in their respective scholarly works on the play, and Mel Gussows New York Times review of Jonah Salzs 1986 performance of Quad notes that a feeling of peril permeates the performance (par. 2). Martha Fehsenfeld quotes Becketts own comment that [t]here was something terrifying about the play (360). This recurrent response to Quad s bodies mirrors the same fear that Sie- bers (Complex Embodiment 279) and Davis (12) locate as the driving emotion behind the all-too-frequent recoil from the perceived nightmare of the disabled body that does not move as it is socially expected to do (Davis 5). Thus the move- ment of Quad s figures around and away from each other enacts both the retreat of the perceived able-bodied from the perceived disabled body in the model theorized by disability studies, and the spectators frequent resistance to empathy or identification with these unfamiliarly and uncomfortably moving performers. This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:48 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 142 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 A demonstrative example of how deeply this resistance to identify with the unfamiliar or distressing bodily experience of another is embedded lies in how regularly Quad s spectators interpret the plays figures as fundamentally non- human. Woycicki imagines them as animated figures within a computer program (139), and Wall likewise perceives the transformation of people into automatons, during the performance the attenuation of four human beings to mere circuits (95). Elsewhere, Salisbury describes the figures as little more than genderless puppets (204) and Herta Schmid calls them things in a purely mate- rial form (266). Eckart Voigts-Virchow goes still further, claiming to observe in the performance a purge of human semblance altogether (212). The covering of the performers individually recognizable human bodies and faces as well as Becketts instruction that they be [a]s alike in build as possible (Complete Works 453) perhaps partially drives this response by making differentiation between the figures more difficult, stripping away any notion of individual character (Starte 194). Yet the figures clothing and stature alone does not seem sufficient to account for the repeated spectatorial interpretations of Quad s figures as utterly non-human; the similarly clad Auditor in Becketts Not I (1972), for example, is not regularly read as a non-human character.3 It is rather, I suggest, a combi- nation of the performers ability to move consistently and precisely within such choreographed restrictionthe inhuman perfection of the players mechanical movement, as Salisbury puts it (211)and the instinctive refusal to recognize unpleasant bodily experience as potentially our own, that renders them non- human to many spectators. We noted earlier that Garland-Thomson has identified how the disabling gaze can extend to perceived physical excess as well as deficiency, [g]iants, dwarfs, visibly physically disabled people, [. . .] contortionists, fat people, thin people, hermaphrodites, conjoined twins, the mentally disabled, and the very hirsute, the perceived superhuman physicality as well as the perceived subhuman physicality rendered Other by the spectators disabling gaze (63). Such, it seems, is the case in Quad. The figures physical capability and its sheer precision gen- erate a gradual recognition by the audience member of how impossible it would be for their untrained bodies to follow such choreography, ultimately pushing the figures beyond the boundary of the recognizably human for many.4 Quad s spectators resist felt communion with the differently functioning body, and with the unwanted bodily experience; so too, disability scholarship observes, does the self-proclaimed able-bodied individual in wider society. concluSIon: ThE ValuE of conflIcTIng affEcTS Spectators and scholars regularly cite the impossibility of genuine contact between Quad s moving figures (Ackerley 153), the lack of any possibility of human connection (Mac Ramoninn par. 3), as the most pessimistic implication of the play in performance. What is less frequently recognized, howeverwhile perhaps equally pessimistic in implicationis how Quad s foregrounding of its This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:48 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms The Conflicting Embodied Affects of Becketts Quad 143 figures precisely choreographed movement catalyzes a similar embodied recoil by the spectator from the performing bodies. The resistance to human connec- tion, embodied in the performing figures repeated swerve at the danger zone of near-contact (Beckett, Complete Works 453), is replicated by the spectators recurrent refusal of kinesthetic empathy with a physically suffering or unfa- miliarly moving body. Just as Quad s figures swerve away from a threatened painful physical collision with each other, so too its spectators recoil from the physically felt discomfort stimulated in their own nervous systems by too intense a kinesthetic immersion in Quad s performance. The spectatorstimulated to empathetic identification by Quad s bodily movement, but resisting this same kinesthetic immersion in the unfamiliar and unpleasant embodied experience of the moving figuresis left stranded in a conflicted state between empathy and resistance, shared feeling and recoil. My intent here is not a reparative reading of empathy (kinesthetic or other- wise) and disability, nor an activist call for heightened empathetic feeling with all human bodies as a means of facilitating meaningful interpersonal connection. Such a reading could be only very tenuously applied to Becketts play, since Quad itself is in many ways a paranoid rather than reparative performance, dispassion- ately exploring and exploiting the observed ableist response to the unfamiliarly moving body for theatrical effect rather than seeking to correct it. I disagree with attempts to read Quad as in some way reflective of such utopian aims, such as Walls claim that the play offers a challenge to the audience to seek the others perspective (96). Rather, I see Quad s value as lying in precisely how it limits this opportunity for empathy or self-projection into anothers existence. Quad chal- lenges its spectator with a stark confrontation with the largely incomprehensible and other bodily existence of another. Thus, as Salisbury puts it, lack of recon- ciliation will traumatically be felt, in all its material specificity by the spectator as well as the performer (214). This resistance to immersion in anothers experience is emphasized, felt traumatically rather than accepted as an ideological norm, highlighted and left as a challenge to its spectator. It is in this proffered trauma or troubling, rather than in any revisionary offer of solution, that we can situate Quad s value to the disability theorist or activist. This idea of Quad as primarily an embodied confrontation with the others bodily existence counters the long-running attempt to theorize the allegorical or symbolic meaning of Quad, or what Sidney Homan calls the self-imposed drive towards symbolism and meaning that spectators and scholars frequently bring to Beckets wordless plays (155). Disability theorists have long noted the common impulse to re-interpret the unfamiliar body, how disability always symbolizes something other than itself  in literary and cultural representation (Siebers, Disability Theory 48). David T. Mitchell and Sharon Snyder decry the literary presentation of the impaired body as not a simply a living human being, but as an opportunistic metaphorical device to lend a tangible body to textual abstractions, a characters physical disability becoming, for example, a meta- phorical signifier of social and individual collapse (222). This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:48 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 144 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 Certainly, previous academic engagement with Quad has seen such attempts to turn the moving bodies of the performers into just such an overdetermined symbolic surface (Mitchell and Snyder 234), as scholars seek a figurative read- ing of the moving bodies as a means of evading a blunt confrontation with their discomfiting embodied reality. Wall, for example, demands that the play be consumed as something closer to an allegory than any other Beckett text (98). He claims that Quad s bodies symbolize the system of alienated labour under the capitalist system (98), and that we must hear the rhythmic noise of industrial machinery in the percussion accompaniment and see shift-workers in the mov- ing figures themselves (99). Connor sees instead the inhabitants of the Inferno and Purgatory from Dantes Divine Comedy (160) and Sandra Wynands sees the central point E as representative of a God beyond representation, possibly even a Christian God and the moving figures as consequently cloistered monks (143). Minako Okamuro (2004) constructs a complex interpretation of how Carl Jung and W.B. Yeatss alchemical theories form the basis for the Quad s choreography and color scheme. The almost comically wide range of symbolic interpretation attached to Quad indicates the very slight correlative that these readings find in the actual text or performance, and indeed hints at the persistent drive to find some interpretative filter that will allow the spectator to evade confrontating Quad s bodies as bodies, and the discomfiting embodied affect generated by this engagement. Increasingly, however, Beckett scholars are beginning to recognize the error in attempting to attach systematized extra-bodily meaning to Quad s devastatingly physical figures (Homan 155). Baylee Brits in particular has decried the symbolic fallacy that has marred much previous engagement with Quad, and instead argues that we must accept the play as one with no semiotic meaning, devoid of a clear referent or any clear allegorical reference (125). Gibson likewise observes that [a]ny concrete reference is indeterminate within the play (238), and Woycicki similarly notes that the abstractness of Quad and its sheer formality imply that almost any meaning within could be attributable to it (147). The difficulty of assigning any satisfactory allegorical or symbolic significance to Quad means that the spectator is left to confront the bare fact of the performers bodiesthis last extremity of human meat, as Beckett elsewhere puts it (qtd. in Zilliacus 3)and their distressing movement. The lack of any perceivable extra-bodily reference eliminates this final opportunity for the spectator to evade the uncomfortable confrontation with Quad s bod- ies. The performers embodiment is Quad s primary focus, and the consequent conflicting embodied affects represent its primary value, as a performance that challenges the spectator to confront the physical and irreducible existence of the Others very other body. In conclusion, Quad s performance tends to evoke intense but contradic- tory embodied affects for its spectators. Recorded audience response testifies to the recurrent experience of a heightened kinesthetic empathy that catalyzes its spectators sense of identification with the onstage figures, as a result of the This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:48 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms The Conflicting Embodied Affects of Becketts Quad 145 performances rhythmically patterned movement and foregrounding of the body in place of dialogue or narrative action. However, this kinesthetic absorption is countered with a simultaneously drive to recoil from the performers, a regularly recorded sense of revulsion or the refusal of immersive engagement with the performing bodies, born of the commonly cited intuition of the unpleasant, even dangerous nature of the figures movements. In this article, I have proffered a hybrid methodological framework of kin- esthetic empathy and disability theory as a means of better exploring the genera- tion and consequence of Quad s embodied affects. As Salisbury recognizes, it is precisely in the uncertainty of affect elicited in a play like Quad, its resistance to pre-existent structures of feeling, the difficulty of describing what is going on in affective terms where there is no pre-digested lexicon to outline its distinctions (21415) that its performance values lies. Investigating Quad through the per- spective of kinesthetic empathy and disability studies offers just such a lexicon for a more rigorous discussion of Quad s embodied functioning, while remaining sensitive to what Salisbury calls the uncertainty of affect and I here call the conflicting affects generated by Quad. Acknowledging more fully the ten- sion between spectatorial engagement and resistance allows us to recognize that Quad s primary value lies in the manner in which it demands that its spectators confront the physical fact of others bodily existencewhile acknowledging the difficulty of such engagement. Notes 1. Voigts-Virchow does prioritize what he calls an aisthetic view of Quad, exploring the audiences sensory perception, but he is focused on the plays pure sensory media perception, the techni- cal elements of the television medium itself, rather than on the human bodies of the perform- ers (211). One notable exception is Susan Joness chapter Samuel Beckett and Choreography in Literature, Modernism and Dance (2013) which explores the links between Quad and Oskar Schlemmers Bauhaus dances. This paper is indebted to Joness earlier work, but it does not attempt to replicate the dance history approach that she has already productively applied to Quad. 2. Theatrical stagings of Quad include the Noho Theatre Groups 1986 production at the American Folk Theater, the Analog Arts 2006 production at the ARTSaha festival, Pan Pan Theatre Company and the Scottish Ballets joint 2013 production at the Edinburgh International Festival, and Pan Pan and the Irish Modern Dance Theatres 2014 production at the Ardhowen Theatre in Enniskillen. 3. To overemphasize the coalescing of the figures identity is, moreover, to ignore Becketts care- ful individualization of the characters of Quadrat I. Each player has his particular percussion and particular sound of footstep in the first section of the performance, and wears a differently colored djellaba (Complete Works 452). A slightly more convincing argument could be made for the de- individualization of the figures in Quadrat II, in which the characters appear in white, and the sound of their footsteps replace their individualized percussion accompaniments. 4. Of course, the spectator lacking dance training could not perform the movements required of many other dance performances either, and the entre or divertissement in the classical ballet structure frequently highlights this. The spectators perception of such skilled movement ability being beyond the capability of the mortal human could equally be exploited in many Romantic ballets to charac- terize the performance of a sylph, sprite, witch, devil, or Willi as non-human figures. This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:48 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 146 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 Works Cited Ackerley, Chris. Ever Know What Happened?: Shades and Echoes in Samuel Becketts Television Plays. Journal of Beckett Studies, vol. 18, no. 12, 2009, pp. 13664. Aherne, Emily. Quad by Beckett: Whats it All About? New Media and English, 14 Mar. 2016, newmediaandenglish.wordpress.com/2016/03/14/quad-by-beckett-whats-it-all-about. Accessed 5 Jan. 2018. Bastian, H. Charlton. The Brain as an Organ of Mind. 3rd ed. Kegan Paul, 1882. Beckett, Samuel. The Complete Dramatic Works. Faber and Faber, 1986. . The Letters of Samuel Beckett, Volume III: 19571965. Edited by George Craig, Martha Dow Fehsenfeld, Dan Gunn, and Lois More Overbeck. Cambridge UP, 2014. . No Author Better Served: The Correspondence of Samuel Beckett & Alan Schneider. Edited by Maurice Harmon. Harvard UP, 1989. Ben-Zvi, Linda. Beckett and Television: In a Different Context. Modern Drama, vol. 49, no. 4, 2006, pp. 46990. Bignell, Jonathan. Beckett on Screen: The Television Plays. Manchester UP, 2009. Brater, Enoch. Towards a Poetics of Television Technology: Becketts Nacht und Trame and Quad. Modern Drama, vol. 28, no. 1, 1985, pp. 4854. Brits, Baylee. Ritual, Code and Matheme in Samuel Becketts Quad. Journal of Modern Literature, vol. 40, no. 4, 2017, pp. 12233. Connor, Steven. Samuel Beckett: Repetition, Theory, Text. 2nd ed. The Davies Group, 2006. Davis, Lennard J. Enforcing Normalcy: Disability, Deafness, and the Body. Verso, 1995. Dimberg, Ulf, Monika Thuberg, and Kurt Elmehed. Unconscious Facial Reactions to Emotional Facial Expressions. Psychological Science, vol. 11, no. 1, 2000, pp. 8689. Fehsenfeld, Martha. Becketts Late Works: An Appraisal. Modern Drama, vol. 25, no. 3, 1982, pp. 35562. Foster, Susan Leigh. Choreographing Empathy: Kinaesthesia in Performance. Routledge, 2011. Gallese, Vittorio. The Inner Sense of Action: Agency and Motor Representations. Journal of Consciousness Studies, vol. 7, no. 1, 2000, pp. 2340. . The Shared Manifold Hypothesis: From Mirror Neurons to Empathy. Journal of Consciousness Studies, vol. 8, no. 57, 2001, pp. 3350. Gallese, Vittorio, Luciano Fadiga, Leonardo Fogassi, and Giacomo Rizzolatti. Action Recognition in the Pre-Motor Cortex. Brain, vol. 119, no, 2, 1996, pp. 593609. Garland-Thomson, Rosemarie. Extraordinary Bodies: Figuring Disability in American Culture and Literature. Columbia UP, 1997. Gibson, Andrew. Beckett and Badiou: The Pathos of Intermittency. Oxford UP, 2007. Gontarski, S.E. Staging Himself, or, Becketts Late Style in the Theatre. Samuel Beckett Today/ Aujourdhui, vol. 6, no. 1, 1997, pp. 8797. Gussow, Mel. Theater: Beckett, in Japanese Style. Review of Quad, by Jonah Salz and the Noho Theater Group, The New York Times, 12 Mar. 1986, www.nytimes.com/1986/03/12/theater /theater-beckett-in-japanese-style.html. Accessed 5 Jan. 2018. Homan, Sidney. Becketts Theaters: Interpretations for Performance. Associated UP, 1984. Jones, Susan. Literature, Modernism and Dance. Oxford UP, 2013. This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:48 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms newmediaandenglish.wordpress.com/2016/03/14/quad-by-beckett-whats-it-all-about http://www.nytimes.com/1986/03/12/theater/theater-beckett-in-japanese-style.html http://www.nytimes.com/1986/03/12/theater/theater-beckett-in-japanese-style.html The Conflicting Embodied Affects of Becketts Quad 147 Klaver, Elizabeth. Samuel Becketts Ohio Impromptu, Quad, and What Where: How it is in the Matrix of Text and Television. Contemporary Literature, vol. 32, no. 3, 1991, pp. 36682. Langer, Susanne K. Mind: An Essay in Human Feeling. Vol. 2. John Hopkins UP, 1972. Mac Ramoinn, Seona. Review of Quad, by Pan Pan Theatre Company and Irish Modern Dance Theatre, 4 Jun. 2014, conorhoughton.tumblr.com/post/87799285455/irish-times-review-of -quad-by-seona-macreamoinn. Accessed 5 Jan. 2018. Martin, John. Introduction to the Dance. W.W. Norton & Co., 1939. Martin, Tim. Samuel Beckett. The Telegraph, 28 Aug. 2009, www.telegraph.co.uk/culture /books/6105016/Samuel-Beckett.html. Accessed 5 Jan. 2018. McMullan, Anna. Performing Embodiment in Samuel Becketts Drama. Routledge, 2010. Mitchell, David, and Sharon Snyder. Narrative Prosthesis Disability Studies Reader. 3rd ed., edited by Lennard J. Davis. Routledge, 2013, pp. 22235. Okamuro, Minako. Alchemical Dances in Beckett and Yeats. Samuel Beckett Today/Aujourdhui, vol. 14, no. 1, 2004, pp. 87103. Patterson, Ian. Quad @ Happy Days Samuel Beckett Festival. The Thin Air, Sept. 2017, http:// thethinair.net/2017/09/quad-happy-days-samuel-beckett-festival. Accessed 5 Jan. 2018. Preston, Stephanie D., and Alicia J. Hofelich. The Many Faces of Empathy: Parsing Empathic Phenomena through a Proximate, Dynamic-Systems View of Representing the Other in the Self. Emotion Review, vol. 4, no. 1, 2012, pp. 2433. Preston, Stephanie D., and Frans B.M. de Waal. Empathy: Its Ultimate and Proximate Baeses. Behavioural and Brain Sciences, vol. 25, no. 1, 2002, pp. 172. Reason, Matthew, and Dee Reynolds. Introduction. Kinesthetic Empathy in Creative and Cultural Practices. Edited by Dee Reynolds and Matthew Reason. Intellect, 2012, pp. 1725. . Kinesthesia, Empathy and Related Pleasures: An Inquiry into Audience Experiences of Watching Dance. Dance Research Journal, vol. 42, no. 2, 2010, pp. 4975. Reynolds, Dee. Kinesthetic Empathy and the Dancers Body: From Emotion to Affect. Kinesthetic Empathy in Creative and Cultural Practices. Edited by Dee Reynolds and Matthew Reason. Intellect, 2012, pp. 12138. Salisbury, Laura. Samuel Beckett: Laughing Matters, Comic Timing. Edinburgh UP, 2015. Schmid, Herta. Samuel Becketts Quad: An Abstract Synthesis of Theatre. Canadian-American Slavic Studies, vol. 22, no. 14, 1988, pp. 26387. Siebers, Tobin. Disability and the Theory of Complex EmbodimentFor Identity Politics in a New Register. Disability Studies Reader. Edited by Lennard J. Davis. Routledge, 2013, pp. 27897. . Disability Theory. 2008. U of Michigan P, 2011. Starte, Josephine. Becketts Dances. Journal of Beckett Studies, vol. 23, no. 2, 2014, pp. 178201. Symonds, Dominic, and Millie Taylor, editors. Gestures of Music Theater: The Performativity of Song and Dance. Oxford UP, 2014. Voigts-Virchow, Eckart. Quad I and Teletubbies or: Aisthetic Panopticism versus Reading Beckett. Samuel Beckett Today/Aujourdhui, vol. 11, no. 1, 2001, pp. 21018. Wall, Brian. . . . but the clouds . . . , Quad, Nacht und Trame: Fantasy, Death, Repetition. Journal of Beckett Studies, vol. 18, no. 12, 2009, pp. 88104. Winston, Frances. QuadProject Arts CentreReview. Review of Quad, by Pan Pan Theatre Company and the Irish Modern Dance Theatre, No More Workhorse, 31 May 2014, nomoreworkhorse. com/2014/05/31/quad-project-arts-centre-review. Accessed 5 Jan. 2018. This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:48 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms conorhoughton.tumblr.com/post/87799285455/irish-times-review-of-quad-by-seona-macreamoinn conorhoughton.tumblr.com/post/87799285455/irish-times-review-of-quad-by-seona-macreamoinn http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/6105016/Samuel-Beckett.html http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/6105016/Samuel-Beckett.html http://thethinair.net/2017/09/quad-happy-days-samuel-beckett-festival http://thethinair.net/2017/09/quad-happy-days-samuel-beckett-festival 148 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 Wonders and mysteries of animal magnetism displayed; or the history, art, practice, and progress of that useful science, from its first rise in the city of Paris, to the present time. With several Curious Cases and new Anecdotes of the Principal Professors. J. Sudbury, 1791. Eighteenth Century Collections Online. Woycicki, Piotr. Mathematical Aesthetic as a Strategy for Performance: A Vector Analysis of Samuel Becketts Quad. Journal of Samuel Beckett Studies, vol. 21, no. 2, 2012, pp. 13556. Wynands, Sandra. Iconic Spaces: The Dark Theology of Samuel Becketts Drama. U of Notre Dame P, 2007. Zilliacus, Clas. Beckett and Broadcasting: A Study of the Works of Samuel Beckett for and in Radio and Television. bo Akademi, 1976. This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:48 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms