Narrative Strategies and Fictional Intellectual Disabilities Review: Narrative Strategies and Fictional Intellectual Disabilities Reviewed Work(s): The Secret Life of Stories: From Don Quixote to Harry Potter, How Understanding Intellectual Disability Transforms the Way We Read by Brub Review by: Michael Patrick Hart Source: Journal of Modern Literature , Vol. 42, No. 2, Varieties of Embodiment: Whose Body? (Winter 2019), pp. 185-191 Published by: Indiana University Press Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2979/jmodelite.42.2.11 JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at https://about.jstor.org/terms Indiana University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of Modern Literature This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:44 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2979/jmodelite.42.2.11 Journal of Modern Literature Vol. 42, No. 2  Copyright  The Trustees of Indiana University  DOI 10.2979/jmodelite.42.2.11 Narrative Strategies and Fictional Intellectual Disabilities Michael Patrick Hart The Pennsylvania State University Michael Brub. The Secret Life of Stories: From Don Quixote to Harry Potter, How Understanding Intellectual Disability Transforms the Way We Read. New York UP, 2016. xiii, 223 pp. $24.95 cloth. $11.99 e-book. In The Secret Life of Stories, Michael Brub offers a new model for understanding literary deployments of intellectual disability that, unlike past frameworks in Disability Studies, does not necessarily depend on the direct representation of disability. Keywords: disability studies / intellectual disability / narrative theory / Michael Brub Do not let the slenderness of The Secret Life of Stories fool you. It is a massive book both in terms of terrain and impact. Over the course of five chapters, Michael Brub continually stresses the importance of studying intellec- tual disability within fiction as well as the need to understand the deployment of these fictional intellectual disabilities instead of focusing on the verisimilitude of intellectual disabilitys representation. Indeed, from the beginning Brub emphasizes that [r]epresentations of disability are ubiquitous, far more prevalent and pervasive than (almost) anybody realizes [because] disability has a funny way of popping up everywhere without announcing itself as disability (1). Brubs observation that disability pops up everywhere without necessarily naming itself separates his work from previous disability theory cornerstone texts. In partic- ular he situates Secret Life as a response to Ato Quaysons Aesthetic Nervousness and Sharon L. Snyder and David T. Mitchells foundational Narrative Prosthesis. Michael Patrick Hart (mph195@psu.edu) is a doctoral candidate in English at The Pennsylvania State University. His research focuses on the academic formalization of English literary studies and the relationship it creates between theories of reading and the production of identity. This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:44 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms mailto:mph195@psu.edu 186 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 Disability popping up everywhere entails deployments of disability that are not strictly confined to representation but also include narrative strategies, devices for exploring vast domains of human thought, experience and action (2). In Secret Life, Brub organizes these strategies into three categories: Motive, Time, and Self-Awareness. Though, as he continually reminds us, these categories are leaky, often bleeding into one another. In his introduction, Stories, Brub offers us just that. These stories recount the genesis of Secret Life and foreshadow the narrative strategies that outline Brubs analytical framework. His anecdotes ultimately reveal that dis- ability is, always already, a social relation, involving beliefs and social practices that structure the apprehension of disabilityand of putative human norms (25). This is not necessarily to support the social model of disability, which, as Disability Studies scholars tend to agree, was at one time quite useful but now seems somewhat problematic. No, Brubs emphasis on the place of disability within social systems reinforces why it does not matter whether Character X has disability Y. What matters, writes Brub, is the web of social relations that constitutes other peoples responses to [Character X] (2425). Diagnostic reading is limited. We must, instead, focus on the narrative deployments of disability. As Brub elaborates in his first chapter, Motive, these narrative deploy- ments do not necessarily entail a direct representation of disability. Specifically, intellectual disability does not need to be represented in a text in order to provide motive. Here, Brub takes the Harry Potter series as his primary example. In the final installment, after Voldemort has hit Harry with the Avada Kadavra killing curse, we find the titular hero in a purgatorial limbo, where he encounters Albus Dumbledore. Its here that Dumbledore reveals to Harry his youthful flirtation with Gellert Grindelwald and wizarding fascism. The driving force, the motive, behind Dumbledores dalliance with Grindelwald? His sister Arianas intellectual disability. As a small child, Ariana was attacked by muggles who witnessed her doing magic. As a consequence, she developed an intellectual disability. Her father, seeking revenge, assaulted the muggle boys, resulting in his imprisonment in Azkaban. He refused to tell the wizarding authorities the truth about the incidents, fearing that if he exposed Arianas intellectual disability, she would ultimately be sent to St. Mungos Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuriesto the Janus Thickey Ward where patients are locked inside, much like an asylum. Next, the Dumbledore family matriarch was accidentally killed when Ariana could not control one of her rages (35). Father imprisoned, mother entombed, Albus was forced to return home to look after Ariana, much to his dismay. A star student and thinking himself destined for much greater things, Albus felt a certain disdain for having to care for an intellectually disabled sister. So when Grindelwald came along, Dumbledore saw not only a way to reach his full wiz- arding potential but also a means to enact vengeance on the muggle world that, up to that point, had held him back through their treatment of Ariana. And yet, as much as Ariana motivates the actions of the entire Dumbledore family, she This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:44 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms Narrative Strategies and Fictional Intellectual Disabilities 187 herself never makes an appearance in the novel save for her portrait on Aberforths wall. Through Ariana, Rowling install[s] intellectual disability at the heart of a narrative that includes no direct representation of a character with intellectual disability (36, emphasis mine). This situation, argues Brub, reflects Ato Quaysons concept of the ethical core from Aesthetic Nervousness. However, as Brub reminds us, Quaysons eth- ical core remains a nebulous term, itself the ethical core of Quaysons own work. If it is obvious in Harry Potter where issues of justice and disability are intrinsi- cally linked, what about narratives without the presence of a character with an intellectual disability? As Brub posits, [i]ntellectual disability can be a textual mattera matter for the text, and a motive for its characterseven when there are no characters with intellectual disabilities to be found (38). Here, he examines Madeleine LEngles A Wrinkle in Time, where it is not the presence of disability but rather the social stigma of disability that represents the novels ethical core. Thus Brub unveils a key limitation to Quaysons otherwise capacious frame- work; that is, Quaysons insistence that aesthetic nervousness depends on an interaction between disabled and nondisabled characters, and thereby necessitates representation of characters with disabilities (40). Through such a dependence, Quaysons model does not account for narrative techniques that construct disabil- ity without needing its representation. Brub limns a similar critique of Snyder and Mitchells Narrative Prosthesis, which presents a model of narrative theory that, like Quaysons, depends more on characters than narrative. Brub does not dispute the value Narrative Pros- thesis offered the field of Disability Studies, but he points out the limitations of a system that, ultimately, ends up treating all narratives the same. Under their model, all disability operates similarly. First a deviance is exposed. Then the narrative consolidates its own existence with an origin story of said deviance. Third, the deviance moves from periphery to center. Finally, the rest of the story rehabilitates the deviance (Snyder and Mitchell 53). This model, according to Brub, can take us down two different routes, one resembling a hermeneutics of suspicion, the other emphasizing the Russian formalist dictum to lay bare the device (4446). Either way, disability is presented as something always to be interpreted, which leaves one with the sense that interpretation does violence to disability and people with disabilities. But sometimes, writes Brub, a disabled cigar is just a disabled cigar (49). Disability, he argues, does not work to one determined end. And Brub stands firmly committed to this belief of radical individuation (49). To this end, he examines a wide swath of individuated texts throughout his book, which, though assigned to a particular modality in Motive, Time, or Self-Awareness, oftentimes sneak into other chapters. For example, in Motive Brub concludes with readings of Maxine Hong Kingstons Woman Warrior and J.M. Coetzees Life and Times of Michael K in order to show how intellectual disability does not just structure the narrative and social relations in these texts but also structures all interpretative procedures, including within the very novel itself. While Brub studies this narrative technique in relation to This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:44 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 188 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 motive, he also demonstrates how that technique allows for narrative experiments with time, which leads into the second chapter of the book. In Time Brub opens with The Sound and the Fury and he reasons that the difficulty in understanding Benjys section stems from the fact that he has a different sense of time than most of us. Benjys atypical perception of time clearly shapes his supposedly disorganized narrative. Brub further argues that Benjy is not merely an unmediated recording of temporally disordered events; he has, to some extent, conscious control over his narrative and therefore its temporal structuring. This, Brub concludes, shows how narrative experiments with time and intellectual disability illuminate the relationality of time; moreover, they indicate that time itself can become human (84). This illumination, given how time operates in the nonliterary world, can only be reached through fiction. With this in mind, Brub arranges a shotgun marriage between Paul Ricoeur and Mikhail Bakhtin to produce an intellectual disability chronotope, by which nar- rative marks its relation to intellectual disability precisely by rendering intellectual disability as a productive and illuminating derangement of ordinary protocols of narrative temporality (83). The intellectual disability chronotope allows narrative to expand beyond boundaries of normative human experience and human per- ception, and therefore also allow for the inclusion of other types of consciousness. Brub develops his idea of the intellectual disability chronotope through Philip K. Dicks Martian Time-Slip, which features a character with an intellec- tual disability, Manfred, who, like Benjy, has a unique perception of time. Not only can Manfred see far into the futurea future where the human colony on Mars is crumbling and Manfred himself is imprisoned by a bevy of medical equip- ment keeping his non-functioning body alivebut he also can apparently exert some bit of control over time. In a series of textual recursions, the titular time- slips, we see how Manfred fool[s] around with time (Dick 227). However, the reader recognizes that these time-slips are not solely contained by Manfreds consciousness. Certain phrases and internal thoughts are clearly focalized through other characters. Thus, Martian Time-Slip does not simply depict a character with an intellectual disability who experiences a radically different sense of time and narrative. Dicks novel textualizes Manfreds intellectual disability such that it pervades the very structure of the work. Time, writes Brub, is not the only thing being warped here; the entire narrative fabric is twisting around Manfreds intellectual disability (89). The leakiness of time and the leakiness of Manfreds consciousness is proliferative, forcing the reader to acknowledge different forms of being in time, especially with regard to intellectual disability. Perhaps even more importantly, as in The Sound and the Fury, Martian Time-Slip produces an intel- lectual disability chronotope featuring an unambiguously fictional disability, and yet both novels demand that we consider, in the starkest of terms, how we are to treat those we consider the most vulnerable (103). A question Brub reiterates at the end of the chapter, and a question that percolates throughout the entire work. Indeed, Self-Awareness, Brubs third chapter, ends by asking the very same question. But first, Brub takes us through a variety of textual examples, This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:44 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms Narrative Strategies and Fictional Intellectual Disabilities 189 including more recent works like Mark Haddons The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time, Elizabeth Moons Speed of Dark, and J.M. Coetzees Foe, as well as older novels such as Nabokovs Pale Fire, Conrads The Secret Agent, and Cer- vantess Don Quixote. On this latter text Brub spills the most ink as he explores how Cervantess novel constructs its own self-awareness as a text in addition to the self-awareness (or seemingly lack thereof) of its intellectually disabled main character. Don Quixote, Brub contends, is intellectually disabled in that he lacks metarepresentational capacitya disability that warps the text, turning it back on itself in a dizzying series of metafictional reflections on the nature of fiction and the nature of reflection (14243). Quixotes lack of a metarepresen- tational capacity not only serves to create metafictional textual effects, but in the process of that creation, breaks the fictional framework in confirmation of it. Thus, intellectual disability becomes the occasion or the device for forging a link between the mechanics of metarepresentation and the machinations of metafic- tion (144). Brub tethers metarepresentation with metafiction to claim that a text mimics self-consciousness when it ruminates over its own textual operations. And when this textual self-awareness involves intellectual disability, the text is no longer limited to formal literary experimentation (160). An intellectually disabled narrative forces readers to reimagine the very parameters of narrative. Likewise, an intellectually disabled self-consciousness requires a reexamination of how we understand self-consciousnessas well as a reexamination of how we treat those with a self-consciousness that falls outside of normative boundaries. In his last section, Minds, Brub goes on the offensive. He specifically takes to task both Theory of the Mind and literary Darwinism (also known as evocriticism) for the ways these schools of thought depend on producing a nor- mative mind, whatever that may be, at the expense of those who do not fit into neurotypicality. With regards to Theory of the Mind, which alleges that we are aware that others have minds and therefore intentions, Brub singles out Lisa Zunshines critical work. For Zunshine, we have Theory of the Mind because some do notnamely autists. Zunshine claims that autists have mindblindness, a term she takes from Simon Baron-Cohen, Director of Cambridges Autism Research Centre. Zunshine, however, fails to recognize how this attribution of mindblindness to autists is itself a version of mindblindness to a consciousness that exists outside its own understanding of what constitutes a normal mind. Surprisingly, Zunshine eventually admits to her own mindblindness on the sub- ject, but ultimately, her work still depends on a Theory of the Mind that reinstalls a normative conception of the human. Yet, according to Brub, she is far more benign than the Literary Darwinists, whose evocriticism depends on an utter antipathy to human individuationsomething Brub champions throughout his work. Essentially, literary Darwinism insists that humans evolved their story telling abilities as a means for survival. The evocritics take story-telling in general as an evolutionary advantage, and do not consider the specialized skills that go into story-telling. According to Brub, this generalization of story-telling causes This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:44 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 190 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 2 the evocritics, in particular Brian Boyd, to eschew environmental explanations for human behavior and to rely solely on social-constructionist straw-humanists who apparently believe that human beings are infinitely malleable (181). In his defense, Boyd does deserve credit for the cleverness of the title of his book: On the Origin of Stories. Yet in this allusion to Darwin, Boyds work proves he has misread On the Origin of Species, which makes explicit that evolutionary adapta- tions are a function of environmental change, and that attempts to force evolution are nothing more than mans feeble efforts to outduel Mother Nature (Darwin 56). Boyds literary Darwinism is a misnomer, for his work is more aptly a form of literary Darwinisticism.1 Still, Brub grants the first half of Boyds book its duedescribing it as rousing stuff that defends the necessity of art to the flourishing of the human (182). Unfortunately, Boyd, in the second half of his book, tries to normativize this human, reducing the mind to one of universal features. Boyd also abhors Theory, but never considers that Theory itself is produced by the same great minds that produce the very literature he so venerates. Boyd generalizes Theory just as he generalizes the human mind. And in doing so, he creates a limited definition of the mind marked by excluding those that dont necessarily fit into this particular interpretative mode. This exclusionism of Boyds misnamed literary Darwinism forces Brub, despite his insistence on the formalist nature of his project, to take up the ques- tion of social justice that, as I mentioned earlier, seems to brew throughout this literary project. This is understandable, given the fact that a 2004 decision written by the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals was used to justify the 2012 execution of Marvin Wilson, an intellectually disabled man. The 2004 decision explicitly cites Steinbeck in its defense of capital punishment for the intellectually disabled. The idea, writes Brub, is a simple and utterly reprehensible one: the under- standing of intellectual disability in fiction can be used as a device for exempting some people with intellectual disabilities from the Supreme Court decision in Atkins v. Virginiaand killing them (192). The Secret of Life of Stories cannot help but conclude that the interpretative stakes of literature and intellectual disabil- ity are no longer limited to formal questionsthey have potentially dire social implications as well. Thus, Brub shows us how intellectually disability not only transforms the way we read fiction, but also the way we read the very narratives of our own lives. Note 1. Morse Peckham identified this difference between Darwinism and Darwinisticism in a spe- cial issue of Victorian Studies celebrating the centennial of On the Origin of Species. Essentially, Darwinism is just that: Darwins theory of evolutionary. Whereas Darwinisticism is an evolu- tionary metaphysic that can be mapped onto a variety other theories: social, economic, aesthetic. It can be anything which claims to have support from the Origin, or conversely anything which claims to have really understood what Darwin inadequately and partially presented (32). This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:44 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms Narrative Strategies and Fictional Intellectual Disabilities 191 Works Cited Boyd, Brian. On the Origin of Stories: Evolution, Cognition, and Fiction. Harvard UP, 2009. Darwin, Charles. 1859. On the Origin of Species. Edited by Jim Endersby. Cambridge UP, 2009. Dick, Philip K. Martian Time-Slip. Mariner, 2012. Mitchell, David T., and Sharon L Snyder. Narrative Prosthesis: Disability and the Dependencies of Discourse. U of Michigan P, 2000. Peckham, Morse. Darwinism and Darwinisticism. Victorian Studies, vol. 3, no. 1, 1959, pp. 1940. Quayson, Ato. Aesthetic Nervousness: Disability and the Crisis of Representation. Columbia UP, 2007. Zunshine, Lisa. Real Mindblindness, or, I Was Wrong. Lecture. 3 Jan. 2013. Modern Language Association Convention, Boston, MA. . Why We Read Fiction: Theory of Mind and the Novel. Ohio State UP, 2006. This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:11:44 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms