<strong>Forms of Attention:</strong> Notes from Harryette Mullen's Tanka Diary Forms of Attention: Notes from Harryette Mullen's Tanka Diary Author(s): Rebecca Hamilton Source: Journal of Modern Literature , Vol. 42, No. 1 (Fall 2018), pp. 124-141 Published by: Indiana University Press Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2979/jmodelite.42.1.09 JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at https://about.jstor.org/terms Indiana University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of Modern Literature This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:13:28 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2979/jmodelite.42.1.09 Journal of Modern Literature Vol. 42, No. 1  Copyright  The Trustees of Indiana University  DOI 10.2979/jmodelite.42.1.09 Forms of Attention: Notes from Harryette Mullens Tanka Diary Rebecca Hamilton The University of Texas at Austin Harryette Mullens Urban Tumbleweed: Notes from a Tanka Diary (2014) advances a quotidian archive of ephemera that brings into focus the convergence of ordinary affects, environment, and racial politics. This assemblage of 366 poems conceived as part of Mullens daily walking practice also stresses the significance of race and racism to the genre of walk poem. Mullens writing distills routine experiences, observations, and sensa- tions into poetic forms, and her resulting collection illuminates environmental damage and systemic inequalities based on class and race, ultimately modeling how a sharpened awareness of body and place cultivates attention to broader social and ecological realities. Keywords: Harryette Mullen / contemporary poetry / attention / environment / racial politics My tanka diary, writes poet-scholar Harryette Mullen, began with a desire to strengthen a sensible habit by linking it to a pleasurable activity. I wanted to incorporate into my life a daily practice of walking and writing poetry. . . . Merging my wish to write poetry every day with a willingness to step outdoors, my hope was that each exercise would support the other (vii). Mullen opens her collection, Urban Tumbleweed: Notes from a Tanka Diary (2013), with a short reflection on the projects beginnings: the poets impulse to deliberately break from her sedentary routine by wedding movement to inscription. Now, she narrates, I look forward to this daily reminder that head and body are connected (vii). Speaking of the projects results, she wryly adds, I did not turn into an amateur naturalist or avid birdwatcher, but I became a bit more aware of my environs (viii). Mullens practice of walking and writing Rebecca Hamilton (rebmhamilton@gmail.com) received her PhD in English from the University of Texas at Austin in 2017. Her work on Harryette Mullen is part of a larger book project, titled Archival Poetics: Ordinary Crisis in Contemporary Poetry. This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:13:28 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms mailto:rebmhamilton@gmail.com Forms of Attention in Harryette Mullens Tanka Diary 125 reinforces her sense of thought and perception as embodied experiences, and it also enables her to observe her variable surroundings with increased dedication and attention. The poetry volume catalogs these outcomes by gathering together 366 notes in the shape of tanka verses (concise, syllabic Japanese poetic forms), or a year and a day of walking and writing (viii). Mullens preface, On Starting a Tanka Diary, confirms Urban Tumbleweed as intentionally constructed both in form and content. Here Mullen outlines her method and materials of assemblage, describing not only the locations and focal points of her walks but also their effects: small, notational poems that record aspects of her environment and ordinary feelings, and that index the convergences between the two. Untitled and undated, Mullens poems amass accounts of her southern California climate, dozens of botanical names and descriptions, sounds, and aspects of the built environment: fences, helicopters, limos, and freeways. At times, the poems create concise narratives that center on human or technological interactions, chronicling, for example, a walkers encounter with a police officer, the opening of an email attachment, and the experience of moving through airport security. Throughout, the focus of Mullens poetry remains on the level of the ordinary and the ephemeralor what Jos Esteban Muoz has described as the traces, glimmers, residues, and specks of things (10). As Mullen writes, The brevity and clarity of tanka make it suitable for capturing in concise form the ephemera of everyday life (ix). The poems of Urban Tumbleweed function as distillations of routine, quo- tidian experiences, observations, and sensations.1 Through the accretion of such poetic documentation, Mullens collection also draws attention to systemic and widely experienced conditions of contemporary culture. These conditions include patterns of information management, environmental damage, an increased tech- nological presence, and inequalities based on class and race. Through the books poetry, preface, and paratext, Urban Tumbleweed demonstrates how a sharpened awareness of ones body and of the details of place ultimately cultivates attention to broader social and ecological realities. Urban Tumbleweed encourages awareness of body and place partly through the books strong emphasis on form and the visual. This emphasis is exemplified by the collections use of an adapted tanka verse and the walk as poetic frame. As Mullen describes in her introduction, her poems modify the traditional tanka poem.2 Though Mullen models her poetry on this formincluding a general adherence to the tanka verses 31 total syllablesshe departs in producing poems that each have three lines instead of the traditional single line in Japanese, or five lines in English, giving her poems the look of haiku. In addition to adapting the tanka, Mullen demonstrates a commitment to form through the projects overall structure. In Urban Tumbleweed, she includes roughly one poem per day over the course of a year and a day, and she uses the frame of the walk itself as a loose but deliberate container that shapes each poems content and composition. The books page layout and sizing further establish its relationship to the visual. Each page includes three tanka poemsequally This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:13:28 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 126 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 1 separated by white space. This layout reinforces the readers sense of these poems as notational, or as acts of reportageinstants rendered through petite descrip- tions. Noticeably small and squat, the books size (in addition to its title) fur- ther suggests the intimacy and portability of the archival genres of diary and notebook.3 Mostly written from a first-person perspectiveat times singular, at times pluralMullens verses stem, according to her own creative rubric, from her personal and affective experiences. Taking individual experience as the books starting point, however, Mullens project demonstrates how awareness of such experience pivots outward to illuminate pressing present-day issues, including those of environmental damage and systemic inequity. Mullens writing specifi- cally mobilizes an acute attention to the realities of ones environmentincluding the ecological and the social as well as the overlap between these categories through the practice of intentionally heightening ones awareness of body and surroundings. Further, Urban Tumbleweed showcases how the environmental attention generated by walking hinges on an acknowledgement of the intersection between racial politics and ordinary embodied movement. noteS and actS oF reportage Urban Tumbleweed playfully engages with the archival genres of diary and note- book, ultimately drawing attention to the capacity of poems to function as both descriptive notes and acts of reportage. The collections subtitle, Notes from a Tanka Diary, makes combined reference to both genres, blurring and yet main- taining a distinction between these formal categories. It emphasizes the parallel between the note and tanka form and suggests how an assemblage of notes may partially compriseif not fully constitutea diary. Mullens preface also directly credits the notational spirit of the tanka form (ix). The collection further asserts poetry as a mode of personal information management through its repeated inclusion of verses that tersely chronicle what appear to be current eventsnews topics or local incidents that the poet encounters. The poems also report on minute environmental features, rendering these details as newsworthy stories. In addition to providing a means of managing information, Mullens poetry thus regularly reflects on and models the processes of information collection and dis- persal. Through the books reflection and modeling, Urban Tumbleweed affirms that poetry writingand potentially poetry readingmay encourage the kinds of focused attention critical to absorbing the details of ones own experiences and to avoiding information overload. The idea of the poem as note and, further, as self-conscious reflection on note-taking inheres throughout the book, appearing in several tanka verses. The verse that most foregrounds the salience of the note form within the col- lection appears early in the text. It reads: In high-school biology class my / laboratory partner took apart the frog / while I observed and took accurate notes (22). Here the speaker recalls her own position as observer in contrast This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:13:28 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms Forms of Attention in Harryette Mullens Tanka Diary 127 to that of her high-school biology lab partner. The poem signals these separate roles largely through its use of sonic devices and repetition: each participant took somethingthe partner takes apart the frog while the speaker takes notes. Mullen further clarifies that the speaker not only records through inscription, but also that her notes are accurate. Especially coming so near the beginning of Urban Tumbleweed, this tanka verse contributes to a readers sense of each indi- vidual poem as a notational tool and of the poems often first-person speaker as an astute and careful observerone who is committed to precisely transcribing the details of all that she observes. A later tanka verse repeats this explicit focus on the poem as both notation and as a means of reflecting on the archival process of writing. Mullen writes, I leave traces of ink on paper. Others / cant resist spray-painting a boulder / or carving their names in the skin of a tree (53). In this short verse, the poet both aligns her own poetic acts of inscription with other forms of markingspray paintings and tree carvingsand differentiates between the two. While the poets intervention appears as something more passive and discreet (she only leave[s] traces), the personification of the tree (with its skin) suggests that the actions of the carver, at least, are both more lasting and more aggressive. By distinguishing between these two parallel yet dissimilar modes of environmental inscription, the poem underscores the ethics of Mullens own archival project. While her writing, as she acknowledges here, may not be as long-lasting as other forms of environmental inscriptionphysical interactions with land, for exampleher poetry provides a means of archiving without doing harm to her surroundings. Like the earlier tanka verse, this poem accentuates the collections focus on poetry as a vernacular form of meaningful, if minute, environmental notation and a means of pointedly considering how information about the present gets recorded and relayed. In addition to drawing such explicit attention to the poem as a notational form and to the archival process of the poets writing, Urban Tumbleweed demon- strates how poetic practice can both echo and diverge from the kind of infor- mation management that contemporary news media provides. The books first poem compels the reader to keep the idea of the newsas well as its literal and conceptual packagingin mind: The morning news landed in the driveway, folded, / rolled, and rubber-banded, wrapped in plastic / for protection from the morning dews (1). The morning news is pointedly juxtaposed through rhyme and bookend positioning with the morning dewsencouraging readers to think about these two early-day arrivals in conversation with one another. While the poem articulates how the news (in the form of a neatly packed newspaper) requires shelter from the immediacy of the elements, it also signals the parallel significance of the two quotidian components: the days current events and the material features of the mornings environment. This juxtaposition recurs shortly thereafter in a tanka verse that reads simply: Instead of scanning newspaper headlines, / I spend the morning reading names / of flowers and trees in the botanical garden (2). Here the poems first end-stopped This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:13:28 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 128 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 1 line break reinforces the separation between the act of scanning news headlines and the act of presumably more focused reading of botanical designations. Though scanning in this context announces a fast-paced and dismissive mode of attention, the term also hints at the process of determining a poems prosody (considering and marking syllables and patterns of stress). Mullens pun thus demands reflection on the distinct kinds of attention and analysis one brings to poetic forms in relation to those offered to contemporary events as they are depicted by news media. In this way, Urban Tumbleweed positions the absorption of news media coverage alongside the significance of noticing and articulat- ing embodied affective experiences produced in part by this experience. While Mullens poem offers a pointed distinction between a focus on news and on the physical environment, it also emphasizes the attention required to meaningfully engage with either and the parallel importance of observing the details of place and absorbing information about current events. Mullens verses are not only framed in opposition or contrast to the news. They also consistently emphasize the potential affinities between poetry and media reporting by demonstrating how the tanka form may encapsulate local occurrences or even global events.4 In so doing, Mullens verses provide their own poetic version of present-day accounting. One short verse reads: A man disguised as a baggy cow / steals twenty-six gallons of milk from Walmart, / then gives it all to strangers outside the store (82). Another narrates: Incident at Hollywood and Vine: Los Angeles / City firefighters rescue a man caught / under train, struck by Metro Red Line (77). And a third recounts: In the aftermath of the tsunami, / the rescuers look for survivors, find in / the arms of a tree a hungry baby boy (115). The tone varies across these poems, which, in their journalistic accounting, function as terse acts of reportage. In the first poem, the news relayed proves to be much more lighthearted; the image of the man disguised as a baggy cow appears as a comical, warm-spirited figure. By contrast, in the last poem, the tone turns somber; the stakes of seeking life after a tsunami are dramatically higher, and though the results of this search are positive, the poem suggests that many lives have been lost. Even while the poems function as acts of reportage, they distinguish them- selves from the forms of news media coverage they evoke. In this way, Mullens verses echo Jahan Ramazanis observation that the news told in poetry isnt con- ceived the same way as it is in newspapers and other news media since even newsy poems question journalisms language, procedures, and assumptions (123). In the third of these reportage poems, as in one of the tanka verses referenced above, Mullen personifies a tree. This trope of personifying plants and animal life recurs throughout Urban Tumbleweedespecially early in the collection, emphasizing a sense of connection and even kinship between the poet and what she observes (and playing with readers expectations).5 Complicating expected forms of news media reporting, these instances of personification also display Mullens atten- tion to the quotidian. Such tanka verses also distinguish themselves from news coverage through their minimal inclusion of context. Instead, each verse distills This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:13:28 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms Forms of Attention in Harryette Mullens Tanka Diary 129 a singular takeawayan angle on the story that by no means encompasses the storys totality. The formal limitations of Mullens tanka versestheir roughly 31-syllable cap, the small space that they each occupy within a third of a page shape the amount of information they are able to relay. These snippets of reportage are, then, like the rest of Mullens tanka verses, notational in form. They are notes, as stated in the collections subtitle, because they provide succinct, often partial sketches of specific aspects of everyday lifeincluding the kinds of social and political events that the poet both figuratively and literally encounters. Positioning poems that report current events alongside those that record ordi- nary affects and ecological details, Mullen affirms that the quotidian is equally worthy of consideration. Her mode of writing thus enhances poetic attention to the ordinary as a form of news other than what we receive from media outlets. This form of accounting is specifically interested in details, and in registering the sensations of immediate and everyday experiences. In Mullens work, this type of poetic newsor notational documentationalso displays awareness of the routine experiences that both contribute to and stem from systemic environmental and social conditions that structure life in the twenty-first century US. Urban Tumbleweed s focus on news and information management notably intersects with its attention to the proliferation and effects of digital technolo- gies, which also punctuates the broader collection. Reflecting on the difficulty of remaining fully awake to the world outside oneselfparticularly outside the loop of technological tools that enable one to listen to news programming while in motionone tanka verse reads: Walking along the green path with buds / in my ears, too engrossed in the morning news / to listen to the stillness of the garden (6). The first line break here emphasizes Mullens pun on budsa term also given to headphones.6 The poem shows the speaker only partially noticing her surroundings, focused on the sounds of news coming from her portable device. She is too distracted to be able to listenin a somewhat synesthetic phrasingto the stillness of her environment. In using the word stillness here, in contrast, for example, to sounds or even silence, Mullen creates a contrast and an intersection of the senses. Because the sounds of the news completely engross the speaker, she is unable to attend to her environment, which requires a combination of listening and feeling. Finally, by describing the stillness of the garden, the poem contrasts the sensory experience of ones immediate, natural surroundings with the noise of the news delivered by way of a digital device. The collection distills observations and questions about the effects of digital technologies and the commensurate increased pace of ordinary life, ultimately demonstrating how the poem may function as an intentionally slower type of archival technology. In a later verse, Mullen writes: Clicking through images downloaded / from your camera. Those buskers havent finished / playing, and already theyre in your archive (50, emphasis added). The poem pictures the speaker reviewing the digital photographs that shes just takenpresumably downloaded onto a device. She reflects that the time between capturing these images and reviewing them is so short that her subjectsthe buskersare still This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:13:28 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 130 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 1 in the midst of their performance. As with the poem discussed above, the tanka verse here, too, draws attention to two different sensory experiences: seeing and hearing. While the first line focuses on the visualthe experience of looking at photographsthe second makes reference to the sonicthe unfinished buskers. The final line encapsulates the specifically archival aspect of the poets image collection, while also doubly suggesting that the work of the tanka poem itself is to archive the experience of archiving in a pointedly digital context. Further, Mullens writing showcases a means of self-reflectively recording present-day experiences in a way that draws attention to the limits of such a process and to the advantage of enabling readers to gradually absorb content rather than scan- ning or feeling overrun by it. This poem provides an opportunity to make sense of the strangely instantaneous process of information gathering and management enabled by digital technologies; it also provides a space in which to record this experience without necessarily reproducing its hurried pacing. As notes that often reference present-day technologies, Mullens tanka poems demand to be read in conversation with forms of social media, such as Twitter, that enable and encourage short, notational bursts of individual commentary or observation. Just as the poems both establish parallels with and divergences from news media reportage, they also resemble and differentiate themselves from nota- tional social media engagement, such as tweets, the short messages on Twitter. The tanka verses allotted 31 syllables recall the tweets maximum 140-character count.7 Like several of Mullens puns, the designation tweet conflates the nat- ural and technological, equating social media comments with a birds chirping (and referencing Twitters logo, a bright aqua bird). Short forms of social media and poetry, such as the tweet and tanka verse, also share in their potential to offer quotidian means of environmental and social engagementpermitting individu- als to meld the everyday and the newsworthy. At the same time, Mullens preface frames her writing project through an acute awareness of creative pacing. While her poems remain notational, like many short-form modes of social media engagement, they are deliberately spaced out, each tanka verse representing (and presumably generated through) a single days walking. As with social media, the notational form suits ordinary engagement in its brevity and its capacity to distill specific observations or preliminary ideas. In contrast to much social media engagement, which thrives on the capacity to create and share content both constantly and instantaneously, however, Mullens poems are punctuated by the space of time and reflection that divides their content and composition. One poem specifically encourages readers to consider the stakes of struc- turing time to contemplate and write (as Mullen does in her combined walking and writing practice) by positing questions about how time and surroundings are now felt, and by suggesting that slow consideration and reflective observation are increasingly difficult to cultivate. Mullen writes: Do they lie down still in soft grass / to gaze up at a sky of roaming shape-shifting / clouds? Do children still have time for daydreaming? (57). The poem asks: is there any longer space This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:13:28 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms Forms of Attention in Harryette Mullens Tanka Diary 131 in the present day for tranquil lingering and imaginationespecially, we might read, for those who grow up surrounded by digital technologies that encourage rapid, divided attention? This poem echoes the concerns of Rebecca Solnit, who writes: The multiplication of technologies in the name of efficiency is actually eradicating free time by making it possible to maximize the time and place for production and minimize the unstructured travel time between. New timesaving technologies make most workers more productive, not more free, in a world that seems to be accelerating around them (10). As Solnit notes, while technologi- cal proliferation enables increased productivity, it diminishes the experience of restfulness between activities. Mullens own writing and walking practice draws attention to the pressures of contemporary technologies and works to counter some of their negative effects. environment and inequitY Attention to felt experience and to the materiality of self and environment is central to Urban Tumbleweed. Not only does Mullens poetry catalog the ephemera of the everyday, it also links this practice to developing an intentional awareness of ones physicality and surroundings. In contrast to the scattered, fragmentary, and often sedentary attention that digital technologies may produce (and often require), Mullens tanka diary focuses and cultivates the poets consciousness of self and environment. This heightened attention enables (and is enabled by) archival writing that focuses on a wide range of quotidian experiences: from the particular feelings of an individual walker on a given day to the evidence of pollution and climate change to specific observations of signs of systemic social inequities. Mullens poems bring into focus how practiced attention to the small- scale details of ones everyday life facilitates both the perception and articulation of widespread and systemic forms of US crisis, at the same time substantiating these conditions as grounded in ordinary, quotidian experiences. Mullens tanka verses demonstrate the poets heightened attention to her sur- roundings through the books depiction of environmental components that mud- dle the borders between the purportedly natural and unnatural. Urban Tumbleweed often catalogs the ways in which these aspects of the poets surroundings appear to intermix or bleed into each other, registering both the complexity of place and the ways in which moving through space enables the poet to identify such envi- ronmental patterns. For example, in one verse Mullen notes birds fighting for food scraps just outside two corporate chains: Two seagulls face off in the parking lot / between Costco and In-N-Out, / quarreling over a half-eaten hamburger bun (19). In the poem from which the collection takes its title, she likewise writes: Urban tumbleweed, some people call it, / discarded plastic bag we see in every city / blown down the street with vagrant wind (32). In this poemand in the books titleMullen combines seemingly opposed elements (the urban with the plants diaspore or tumbleweed) to form a more apt descriptor for a flying piece of trash. The designation also metaphorically signals the broader integration of This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:13:28 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 132 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 1 distinct environmental features that the book registers as well as the collections framing focus on movement as a means of more alertly inhabiting a place. Building on this intersection of the natural and built environment, the books poems succinctly record contemporary evidence of environmental degra- dation such as air pollution and species endangerment. In one of the relatively few poems in which Mullen employs second-person address, she writes as if speaking informally to a southern California newcomer of the regions resident smog: Los Angeles isnt always this smoggy, you know. / There are days the sky is so clear / you can see the HOLLYWOOD sign from here (25). Mullens casual address lends a cavalier tone, and the poems end-stopped rhyme gives the short verse a light-hearted and even playful melody. Yet the content of the poem contrasts these elementsemphasizing not just the regularity of air pollution but also the commercialization of place that may reinforce environmental damage and depletion. Even when the sky is so clear, the payoff is simply a view of fur- ther development. In a surprisingly hopeful turn, another tanka poem highlights both the human causes of species endangerment and the promising return of one animal: Trapped and hunted to the edge of / extinction, gone for nearly ninety years / when a lone gray wolf appears in California (96). Mullens first line break bolsters the content of the poems opening ideathe way in which human activity so diminished the number of gray wolves that the species reached the very edge of  complete annihilation. While certainly hopeful, the description of the reemerged gray wolf as lone signals to the reader that however promising this appearance, there is no guarantee of easy recovery from this specific history of species endangerment. A mounting collection of Mullens poems provides evidence that her sur- roundings include class-based inequalities, demonstrating the prevalence of economic disparity particularly in the greater Los Angeles area. A couple of poems suggest the relative privileges of the speakerand potentially the reader. One verse reads: A valet parks your car at the supermarket. / A beach butler reserves your plot of sand / with folding chair and bright umbrella (84). Here the momentary second-person address points to the potential complicity of the reader in systems of social inequality or privilege at the same time that it may substantiate the self-address of the speaker. Through its use of quotation marks, the poem lingers on the language used to designate service industry positions in connection to the specificand strangely basic seeminglabor that both a valet and beach butler do for those who can afford their assistance. A later poem similarly recognizes the exclusivity of the speakers community: At night our tidy-clean, green park is locked / to keep out rough sleepers who bed down on sidewalks / next to shopping carts full of rubbish (94).8 Here, as in the earlier verse, the second-person address potentially includes the reader as subjectlike the speaker, someone who might live in an area where parks are locked to prevent anyone from staying there at night. Another poem emphasizes the archival work of an itinerant womanfleetingly suggesting a small parallel between her and the speaker, but then affirming their differences: A homeless woman spends her This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:13:28 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms Forms of Attention in Harryette Mullens Tanka Diary 133 days collecting / odd scraps of paper, then sits in front / of the all-night drugstore, poring over them (102). Like the woman who spends her days collecting, the poet creates and gathers together these notational recordings of her surroundings through focused observation. As these particular archival materials amass, they constellate specific examples of class-based inequity to substantiate an illustration of the systemic nature of societal divisions. Urban Tumbleweed similarly emphasizes the politics of contemporary immi- gration, acknowledging the formative ways in which the places where the poet walks (as well as the poets own presence in her home state) are constituted by histories of migration. In Mullens preface, she remarks: Like many inhabitants of Los Angeles, I am not native to this state of elemental seasons: wind, fire, flood, mudslide, and earthquake. Like ice plant, eucalyptus, and nearly all of LAs iconic palm trees, I too am a transplant to this metropolis . . . (viii). Comparing herself to the non-native plant life of southern California that becomes iconic, Mullen emphasizes both her own history of travel and the capacity for environmental and cultural integration. In one tanka verse, her focus on wildlife shows the suspicion and animosity with which immigrants may be treated in the US. Mullen writes: A bird flew across the border / and when it came to rest, was suspected / of being an alien and possibly a spy (100). Again, though her tone is playful, the mes- sage of the poem remains starkly pressing; when the border-crossing bird lands, notably to rest, it is met not only with mistrust but also with the suspicion of wrongdoing. Contributing to a notable cluster of verses that politicize the stakes and effects of present-day US immigration, these poems draw attention to the inequalities that mark and organize contemporary public culture on a scale much larger than any one of these examples can alone record. As Urban Tumbleweed progresses, Mullens verses increasingly present notes on contemporary inequity in combination with an awareness of environment and ordinary lifeemphasizing how the cultivation of attention to each of these aspects of experience and surroundings may be mutually reinforcing. This collec- tion thus counters what Evie Shockley describes as the harmful false dichotomy that says one has to choose between writing about nature and writing about socio-political subjects (730). Urban Tumbleweed consistently undercuts such an understanding, positioning Mullen as an environmental writer who does not leave behind questions of identity politics when considering the experiences and locations about which she writes. race and walk poetrY The paratexts in Mullens collection, including the preface and epigraphs, frame her project through explicit reference to the quality of environmental awareness rooted in the process of traveling by foot. Mullen notes, Walking instead of driving allows a different kind of attention to surroundings. Each outing, however brief, becomes an occasion for reflection (vii). From the outset, the tanka poems are advanced as archival writing shaped by this mode of attention, which, in turn, This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:13:28 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 134 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 1 is produced by quotidian bodily movement. The frame of each of Mullens verses is twofold: the poems are limited by her amended tanka form whilst shaped by her walks, a double constraint emerging as a component of Mullens stated quest to write poetry that archives the ordinary. The verses in Urban Tumbleweed may thus be read as what Roger Gilbert calls walk poems: poetry that is composed by walking and that takes the experience of walking as a key focal point. Situating the collection within this tradition, Mullen notes in her preface that Urban Tumbleweed is not tethered to a particular path or location but to the activity of navigating various environments: This is a record of meditations and migrations across the diverse terrain of southern Californias urban, suburban, and rural communities, its mountains, deserts, ocean, and beaches. In the greater Los Angeles my walks can range from downtown streets and alleys to spectacular natural landscapes to outdoor shopping malls. (viii) Mullens writing develops the inherently archival dimensions that Gilbert ascribes to the walk poem: In its purest form, the walk poem presents itself not as a written record of a walk, composed after the fact, but as a linguistic event occurring simultaneously with the walk itself, and therefore absolutely coextensive with it (23). Many of Mullens verses accord with this descriptionsuggesting the immediacy of an experience by depicting it as if the time and space between the poems content and its composition were entirely collapsed. For example, one tanka verse reads: I follow the bloody red footprints back / to their source casual mayhem of smashed / ketchup packets smearing the gritty sidewalk (56). Others disavow such immediacy, representing instead the poets reflection on past experiencesseveral of which do not explicitly connect to walking at all. For example, in one poem the speaker recalls: Those many years ago I imagined green hair / of fir tree, handshake of friendly palm, / melancholy tears of weeping willow (27). Still, as a collection of poetry shaped by a range of walking experi- ences, Mullens poems centrally rely on what Gilbert calls the closure provided by the walk as formal frame (6). Throughout Urban Tumbleweed, Mullens poems intermittently signpost the poets act of walking, recalling for the reader the projects framing aims and the tradition of walk poetry. In one verse, she writes: The day I notice, returning from my walk, / a hole worn through the heel of one sock, / my thoughtful sister has sent me a new pair (69). This poem does not represent Mullens walking expe- rience as immediate, as Gilbert suggests that the purest walk poem would reflecting back on the day as opposed to simply asserting in present tense I notice. Another poem more directly affirms the convergence of walking and poetic composition, though it accomplishes this through the conditional tense. Mullen writes, When you see me walking in the neighborhood, / stopping to admire your garden, I might be / composing a tanka in my head (95). As the poem claims, both walking and the correlated step of stopping to admire might spark the poets process of composing. Another explicit walk poem ref- erences the type of movement that the poet undertakes: Meandering through This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:13:28 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms Forms of Attention in Harryette Mullens Tanka Diary 135 hill-top neighborhood / of splendid old mansions, I loiter at wrought-iron gates / picketing the senators home (95). In contrast to the tanka verse before, the starts and stops of the poets walk chronicled here are pointedly political. As Mullen meanders through what appears to be an established and wealthy areaa hill- top with splendid old mansionsshe comes to loiter outside a senators home. While the poem leaves ambiguous whether shes alone or accompanied, her lin- gering is framed as an act of protest, underscoring the attention to everyday class divisions. In this case, too, the tanka verses present tense relays not only the walk poems specificity but also the potential immediacy of this walking experience. Though the poems do not always directly invoke the poets body or explic- itly reference the experience of walking, many emphasize embodied movement through the inclusion of directional cues and geographic features. In one tanka verse, for example, Mullen details the movement of her own seemingly incar- nate shadow, indirectly emphasizing her bodys movement and the surroundings through which she walks: My reckless shadow, landing on the twelve-lane / freeway down below this pedestrian bridge, / playing chicken with oncoming cars (25). Here the shadows landing and playing chicken both contrasts and indicates how the pedestrian poet remains in motion on the bridge above the wide, busy freeway. In one of the few tanka verses that employ the first-person plural, Mullen highlights the range of sensory experiences encouraged by the act of walking outdoors. She writes: We smell the rain coming, see dark clouds / and lightning before we hear thunder, watch / storms arrive, wait to get wet before running indoors (57). The speaker underscores the felt experience of weather the smell, sight, sound, and ultimately the touch of rain.9 In advancing accounts of sensory experience and physical movement, these poems foster attention to embodiment on a range of scales and through a variety of locationsrooted in the act of walking. As Solnit writes: Walking shares with making and working that crucial element of engagement of the body and the mind with the world, of knowing the world through the body and the body through the world (29). Walking and the poetry spurred by this practice activatefor both the poet and the readeran awareness of the shifting relationship between ones body and the world through which one moves. While Gilbert traces a history of walk poetry that is predominantly white and male, Mullens tanka verses unsettle such a narrow picture of the genre. Her work demands that the category of walk poem be considered in the context of an expansive tradition of black environmental poetics.10 Camille T. Dungy writes in her introduction to the edited collection Black Nature: Four Centuries of African American Nature Poetry (2009), we dont see much African American poetry in nature-related anthologies because, regardless of their presence, blacks have not been recognized in their poetic attempts to affix themselves to the landscape. They havent been seen, or when they have it is not as people who are rightful stewards of the land. They are accidentally or invisibly or dangerously or temporarily or inappropriately on/in the landscape. (xxvii) This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:13:28 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 136 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 1 Black Nature addresses the paucity of anthologized black environmental poetry, bringing to light the myriad ways African American poets have engaged the con- flicts and confluences between their environments and their daily lives (xxxiv). As a black, female poet whose tanka verses intentionally address the intersection of the environmental and the quotidian, Mullen both fits into and extends the tradition of black environmental poetics that Dungys anthology recognizes.11 Mullens two epigraphs, which punctuate the page between preface and poetry, frame the books focus on the racial politics of walking by invoking the words of two celebrated black intellectuals, Richard Wright and George Washington Carver. Both epigraphs are instructionalappearing to simultane- ously address the poet, the reader, and the walker. Their brevity and lineation also preview the short form of Mullens own tanka verses to come. The first epigraph, by Wright, is notably a haiku. It directs: Keep straight down this block, / then turn right where you will find / a peach tree blooming (xi). The second, by Carver, guides: Look about you. Take hold of the things that / are here. Let them talk to you (xi). Wrights words commence as routine directions mightsignaling through second-person address the path one should take presumably through a city space, walking straight, turning rightbut close on the promise of envi- ronmental discovery, the image of a tree in bloom. Carvers instructions seem to continue where Wrights left off, speaking not to the trajectory of ones movement but to the quality of ones awareness and sensorial experience. In directive prose, he advocates for the intentional use of ones eyes, the literal and figurative embrace of and receptivity to ones surroundings. The books framing emphasis on these instructional words on walking from two distinguished black intellectuals whose work bridges racial politics with the literary and the scientific, affirms Mullens project within a lineage of black environmental engagement, writing, and inven- tion. The epigraphs also foreground how attention to the racialized dimensions of ordinary movement structures Mullens collection as a whole.12 In combination, the books epigraphs highlight the poetrys concern for the awareness one should bring to bear on environmental navigation, and the implicationsto use Garnette Cadogans phrasingof walking while black (142). Mullens verses also indicate how the act of walking cannot be separated from considerations of race and racism. The two poems in Urban Tumbleweed that encapsulate encounters with police imply racial profiling. The first reads: A cop guards the bridge I cross to catch / my bus. He watches as I slow my walk / to stare at the presidents car passing below (37). The second states: Visiting with us in Los Angeles, our friend / went out for a sunny walk, returned / with wrists bound misapprehended by cops (94). Both of these poems foreground the embodied experience of the walker: the poet in the first, and the visiting friend in the sec- ond. They both also highlight how police presence (or direct interference) affects the experience of that walker. And, finally, while neither poem explicitly signals racial profiling as the cause for police scrutiny or intervention, they both suggest the possibility of experiencing such racially motivated policing especially while simply walking (and looking) around. This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:13:28 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms Forms of Attention in Harryette Mullens Tanka Diary 137 To be clear, Urban Tumbleweed does not specifically describe the con- straints of walking as a black woman in the various terrains Mullens tanka poems reference. Still, as the first of these two poems records, for example, how the officer guarding the bridge pointedly observes the poets slowing body, it underscores the racial (and potentially gender) politics of walking. Likewise, the second poem emphasizes just how extreme the disparity is between one walkers intentions to take a sunny walk and the results of that walk being wrists bound. The fact that both poems indirectly address racial profiling emphasizes that walking is not simply a pleasurable, exploratory act, but one that always compels negotiation of structural forms of inequality. Read together, the epigraphs and these two tanka verses underscore the collections merged awareness of individual movement and racial politics. Mullens writing illustrates the argument that ephemeral and embodied sensations of place are always inseparable from the realities of race and racism. It also stresses that the possibilities of ordinary environmental attention remain tethered to iden- tity categories and to the realities of experiencing identity-based inequalities, specifically anti-black racism. Slowing down Central to the content, form, and archival stakes of Urban Tumbleweed is the poets deliberately slow-paced and detail-oriented engagement with her various environments. As Mullen notes above, the act of walking generates a form of ordinary attention distinct from that available to those driving (or, presumably, those engaged in other types of passive movement). Additionally, as the epi- graphs of Mullens collection suggest, even the most quotidian navigation of public spaces on foot produces affective experiences and practices of attention that vary based on the appearance of ones body. Across the space of Urban Tumbleweed, Mullens tanka verses amass as notational documentation focused on the specific, often minute or ephemeral aspects of ordinary life. They model for readers the capacity for meaningful embodied attention to the interplay of self and environment through short-form and movement-based poetry. Mullens archive also avails readers the chance to reflect on their own habits of focus and information managementnotably the significance of attunement made possible by slowing down. The books recurrent references to digital technologies and the increasing speed of daily life compel readers to consider how their own reading habits accord or contrast with this accelerated pacing. Urban Tumbleweed is, after all, comprised of such breezy short forms that it seems rather easy to read through quickly. Since each three-line tanka verse is rendered as an almost ephemeral note, one might spend relatively little time engaging with each poem or with the poetry volume as a whole. In other words, it is possible to replicate the short, notational qualities of the poem by breezing past the material presented. While there is no inherent form of awareness brought to, or generated as part of, poetry writing or reading, as This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:13:28 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 138 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 1 I have argued above, the verses in Urban Tumbleweed seem themselves to caution against swift dismissal by a reader. In this way, Mullens verses participate in what Dale Smith describes as slow poetry, a generic category that carries the expectation of close, formal observation. Slow poetry, in Smiths words, values meaningful descriptions of the world and can be a way to help orient attention again in art to the world (Slow Poetry: An Introduction n.p.).13 For example, one of Mullens poems seems to orient such focus on the world by indirectly addressing reader as it chronicles the poets encounter with a command to pay closer attention to her environment: At the entrance to the botanical garden, / a sign hung on the gate forewarns: Slow down. / Watch for turtles on the roads and paths (47). Here the poems first line acknowledges the specificity of the poets location, while the second line, notice- ably end-stopped after the words slow down, encourages contemplation of slow- ing the very process of poetry reading. The final content of the sign also suggests that what accompanies a decrease in pacing is the ability to look out for (and not do harm to) the otherwise potentially unnoticed elements of ones environment. Another tanka poem echoes the importance of slowness by urging the experi- ential possibilities born of stillness: If you are perfectly still when it hovers near, / youll hear it hum; small engine with rapid / wings, a bird no bigger than your thumb (48). The rhyme (of hum and thumb) underscores the hummingbirds sound and miniature size, which the observer may experience if perfectly still. The poems second-person address also reflects the texts potential to be read as an instruction directed toward the reader. While slow reading wont enable readers to physically bear witness to turtles or hummingbirds, Mullens verses suggest that the willingness to focus and examine information or surroundings without hurry develops both an environmental ethics and more intricate sensory experiences. Mullens writing ultimately models a mode of poetic engagement that both fosters and indicates the cultivation of an embodied attention to the details of ones surroundings. Given the books emphasis on the relationship between racial politics and the quotidian movement of walking, Urban Tumbleweed demonstrates how practices of attentionincluding those that generate notational writing as a form of contemporary documentationmust be considered in light of differences of race (and arguably gender). Mullens poetry pushes us to acknowledge the ongoing crises of racial and other social inequalities alongside ecological damage. Further, her work highlights the urgency of developing forms of attention capable of actively observing and making change in the American present. Notes 1. Mullens tanka poems partially reflect what Samantha Pinto has described as an aesthetics of accumulation (176) in her writing on the poets broaderand earlierbody of work. This mode of poetic composition refuses allegorical reading . . . [and] its parts can only and at best offer fleet- ing connections to one another, with no characters or narrative to flow through the book-length form (Pinto 176). Unlike much of Mullens worksuch as Muse & Drudge, which Pinto focuses This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:13:28 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms Forms of Attention in Harryette Mullens Tanka Diary 139 onindividual tanka verses are often quite narrative, and its possible to read more than fleeting connections between them (including between speaker and content). Still, the idea of a book-length aesthetics of accumulation resonates with Urban Tumbleweed, since the book functions as a gathering place for often disparate (and sometimes fleetingly linked) observations or experiences rendered in verse. 2. There are two types of traditional tanka forms, both of which are externally alike in that they are quintet poems with lines, in this order, of 57577 syllables (Turco 360). The first of these addresses one subject in the opening two lines, a second subject in the next two, and then offers a final refrain or restatement (Turco 360). The second type of tanka form makes an observation in the first three lines and then provides a comment on the observation in the last two (Turco 360). Though Mullens poems are often very observational, and they certainly mix attention to distinct subjects, her adapted tanka verses by no means conform to either of these two traditional rubrics. 3. For an account of notebook keeping, see Joan Didions On Keeping a Notebook, in which she suggests that those who keep notebooks do so out of some inherent urge to take stock, reorder, and make sense of what is fleeting (132133). 4. The demonstration of such generic affinities between poetry and the news loosely undercuts William Carlos Williamss famous estimation that It is difficult / to get the news from poems / yet men die miserably every day / for lack / of what is found there (318). For a discussion of Williamss poetry in relation to news media, see Jahan Ramazanis Poetry and Its Others (2014). 5. Examples include: Each sweeping branch of California buckeye / extends a wide green hand, / presenting to the air a feathery white bouquet (Mullen 2); Flame tree, I must have missed your season / of fire. All I see are your ashy knees, your kindling / limbs, branches of extinguished blossoms (3); Paparazzi snap snoozing celebrities / in stretch limos cruising down Hollywood / Boulevard past anorexic palm trees (8). 6. Mullens poetry is famously innovative, especially in the poets use of linguistic play including punning, examples of which show up across Urban Tumbleweed. See Juliana Spahrs Everybodys Autonomy (2001), pp. 89118, on Mullens later poetry (not including Urban Tumbleweed) and its connections to what Henry Louis Gates, Jr. names as the African American tradition of signifyin(g). Spahr notes: Mullen concentrates on the syncretism of thingsholes both breathe and swallow, sleeves are both opened and hemmed, and trimmings are things both added and taken awayand thus presents an example of [Hortense] Spillerss call for a semantic field/fold that is not absolute (102). 7. Fady Joudahs poetry collection, Textu (2014), which was published in the same year as Urban Tumbleweed, provides a compelling contrast to Mullens book in its central consideration of dig- ital technologies and its production of short-form poetry using a technological platform (and its constraints). In Joudahs introduction to Textu, he writes: All the poems here were composed on a cellular phones text message screen. The Textu [text + haiku] poem has only one hard rule: that it be exactly 160 characters long, specific to text-message parameters. The textu poem also suggests a meter in character, not syllable, count (xi). As projects such as Textu (among numerous others) demonstrate, there is certainly no hard and fast line between digital technologies and the kind of careful attention that Mullen connects to poetic engagementthe one can, of course, facilitate the other. In Urban Tumbleweed specifically, Mullens poetry emphasizes the likeness of the tanka form with notational modes of social media engagement as well as demands awareness of the contrasts between her practice of poetry writing and the patterns of attention that she depicts as associated with the use of digital technologies. 8. Other related tanka verses reference homelessness: The homeless woman who hated my shoes / last weeknow lets me buy her / a cup of her favorite mango frozen yogurt (Mullen 85); Standing his ground in a pair of elegant / leather shoes, offering each passer-by / a chance to buy the homeless newspaper (Mullen 94). 9. Gilbert identifies the significance of sensory experience to the designation of the walk poem: the central aim of the walk poem as a genre may be said to consist in a desire to erase the difference This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:13:28 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms 140 Journal of Modern Literature Volume 42, Number 1 between text and experience, to assert and sustain an absolute coincidence of language and bodily sensation (4). Though Mullens verses do not solely present poem and experience as concurrent, they do at times portray bodily sensation. 10. Mullens poetry is absolutely by no means alone in making such a demand. There are countless black poets whose writing may be read as walk poems. For a few specific (and contemporary) exam- ples catalogued in Black Nature (2009), see Evie Shockleys you must walk this lonesome (42), Gerald Barrax Sr.s Barriers (75), and Marilyn Nelsons My Grandfather Walks in the Woods (298299). C.S. Giscombes collections Giscombe Road (1998) and Prairie Style (2008) also provide many examples of walk poems. 11. Published before Urban Tumbleweed, Black Nature does include an earlier poem of Mullens. European Folk Tale Variant reimagines the story of Goldilocks as a trespassing intru- sion by a pre-adolescent vandal against whose criminally negligent parents the Ursidae family ultimately files suit (Dungy 225). 12. Wrights writing (notably various in form: novels, stories, nonfiction, and poems) centrally focused on US racial politics. Carver was famed as an agricultural researcher (botanist, inventor, and early environmentalist), who for almost two decades, spanning the late nineteenth and early twen- tieth century, directed the agricultural department at Booker T. Washingtons Tuskegee Institute. 13. See also Smith, Slow Poetry in America (2014). Works Cited Barrax, Gerald, Sr. Barriers. Dungy, p. 75. Cadogan, Garnette. Black and Blue. The Fire This Time: A New Generation Speaks about Race, edited by Jesmyn Ward. Scribner, 2016, pp. 129144. Didion, Joan. On Keeping a Notebook. Slouching Towards Bethlehem. Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1968, pp. 131141. Dungy, Camille T., editor. Black Nature: Four Centuries of African American Nature Poetry. U of Georgia P, 2009. Gilbert, Roger. Walks in the World: Representation and Experience in Modern American Poetry. Princeton UP, 1991. Giscombe, C.S. Giscombe Road. Dalkey Archive P, 1998. . Prairie Style. Dalkey Archive P, 2008. Joudah, Fady. Textu. Copper Canyon P, 2014. Mullen, Harryette. Urban Tumbleweed: Notes from a Tanka Diary. Graywolf P, 2013. Muoz, Jos Esteban. Ephemera as Evidence: Introductory Notes to Queer Acts. Women & Performance: A Journal of Feminist Theory, vol. 8, no. 2, 1996, pp. 516. Nelson, Marilyn. My Grandfather Walks in the Woods. Dungy, pp. 298299. Pinto, Samantha. Impossible Objects: M. NourbeSe Philip, Harryette Mullen, and the Diaspora Feminist Aesthetics of Accumulation. Difficult Diasporas: The Transnational Feminist Aesthetic of the Black Atlantic. New York UP, pp. 175200. Ramazani, Jahan. Poetry and Its Others: News, Prayer, Song, and the Dialogue of Genres. U of Chicago P, 2014. Shockley, Evie. On the Nature of Ed Robersons Poetics. Callaloo, vol. 33, no. 3, Summer 2010, pp. 728747. This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:13:28 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms Forms of Attention in Harryette Mullens Tanka Diary 141 . you must walk this lonesome. Dungy, p. 42. Smith, Dale. Slow Poetry: An Introduction. Slow Poetry: An Introduction, edited by Dale Smith. Big Bridge. http://bigbridge.org/BB14/SLOWPO.HTM. . Slow Poetry in America. Cuneiform P, 2014. Solnit, Rebecca. Wanderlust: A History of Walking. Viking, 2000. Spahr, Juliana. What Stray Companion: Harryette Mullens Communities of Reading. Everybodys Autonomy: Connective Reading and Collective Identity. U of Alabama P, 2001, pp. 89118. Turco, Lewis Putnam. The Book of Forms: A Handbook of Poetics. UP of New England, 2012. Williams, William Carlos. The Collected Poems of William Carlos Williams: Volume II, 19391962. Edited by Christopher J. MacGowan. New Directions, 1988. This content downloaded from 128.122.149.92 on Tue, 07 May 2019 02:13:28 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms http://bigbridge.org/BB14/SLOWPO.HTM