{ 571 American Adventurers, Parisian Opportunities Joel Barlow: American Citizen in a Revolutionary World richard buel, jr. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2011 433 pp. Gilbert Imlay: Citizen of the World wil verhoeven London: Pickering & Chatto, 2008 299 pp. Cosmopolitan Patriots: Americans in Paris in the Age of Revolution philipp ziesche Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2010 239 pp. Discussing the phenomenon of the lesser Founder, and Thomas Paine as a particular case, Jill Lepore has quipped that in the comic book version of history that serves as Americas national heritage, where the Founding Fathers are like the Hanna- Barbera Super Friends, Paine is Aquaman to Washingtons Superman and Jeffersons Batman; we never find out how he got his super powers and he only shows up when they need someone who can swim (6162). Paine, in Lepores view, probably deserves more, especially given the vast influence of Common Sense on Revolutionary- era readers, but his involvement in the French Revolution and his religious in- fidelity ruined his reputation in his lifetime; drink and depression, which prevented him from writing his own history of the age, left him to an ugly, anonymous death, and for much of the two centuries since then he has been regarded, in Bernard Bailyns words, as an ignoramus who hap- pened to write a work of genius (qtd. in Lepore 64). If such was the fate bryan waterman New York University review essay 572 } early american literature: volume 49, number 2 of an international Revolutionary celebrity like Thomas Paine, what hope is there for even lesser historical figures like his sometime associates, Joel Barlow and Gilbert Imlay? If Paine is relegated to the Aquaman position in the Saturday morning version of American history, does that make Bar- low and Imlay something more like Marvin, Wendy, and Wonderdogor maybe their successors, the Wondertwins, if theyre lucky? The compre- hensive, meticulously researched recent biographies by Richard Buel Jr. and Wil Verhoeventhe first book- length volume on Barlow in fifty years, and the first ever biography of Imlaywould suggest that recent schol- arly interest in the Age of Revolutions has helped broaden our gaze from the marquee names to sidekicks and bit players who can offer surprising insights into the intellectual, commercial, political, and literary networks that spanned the Atlantic in the post- Revolutionary Era. Together with a work like Philipp Ziesches Cosmopolitan Patriots, the two recent biogra- phies help us better understand that these and other Americans in Paris in the 1790s hold forth more than an expats eyewitness account of the French Revolution. Rather, they offer an understanding of how American nation- alism emerged from cosmopolitan encounters, even fraught or failed ones, as much as it did from the development of partisan political cultures at home. Barlow and Imlay come down to us in these biographies as character types, as the books subtitles would indicate. For Buel, Barlow is an Ameri- can citizen who happens to have been launched abroad on business just as the French Revolution kicked into gear. Imlay, for Verhoeven, is less an American abroad than a citizen of the world, albeit one who played his American cardor better yet, his Kentucky cardshrewdly at times. Both men also took advantage of opportunities afforded by the events of the American Revolution to remake themselves in European contexts: as political radicals, as literary figures, and as economic actors. They repeat- edly refashioned themselves, always with an eye on making their fortunes: minding the main chance, in the parlance of The Contrast, the play by their contemporary Royall Tyler. In this they were not alone, of course. Benjamin Franklin was much more successful at this game, and on some of the same stages. Rather, Barlow and Imlay are useful to us as represen- tatives of a generation in which many menand some womenused a Revolutionary public sphere, including literary authorship, to garner pri- vate influence and, at times, personal wealth. For this reason they, like Review Essay: American Adventurers { 573 Paine, have become figures of interest for scholars trying to understand the currents of the Revolutionary Atlantic, not simply relegated to niche studies of early New England poetry or frontier writing, or footnotes in biographies of more famous associates.1 Though Buel tends to think more highly of Barlow than Verhoeven does, and so doesnt overemphasize the similarities between him and his Parisian business associate Imlay, the men lived strikingly similar lives. Verhoeven, by contrast, argues that there are so many extraordinary simi- larities in the details and the chronology of their biographies that Imlay and Barlow can be said to have led parallel lives for much of their adult years prior to the mid 1790s (161). They were both born in 1754, Barlow in Connecticut and Imlay in New Jersey, to families of modest means with ambitions to get more. Both served in the Continental Army, but more importantly used their service as avenues to upward mobility. Both saw literary writing as an additional boost to these ambitions: Barlow in craft- ing himself as an epic poet of the American Revolution; Imlay, after mov- ing to London, as author of a book on the Kentucky frontier, where he had spent at least three years as a land speculator. (While there he hoodwinked Daniel Boone and was in close proximity to James Wilkinsons attempts to deliver Kentucky to Spanish control.) Both put their literary energies to use in the cause of the French Revolution and the movement for liberty more generallyBarlow in political tracts and Imlay in his political novel The Emigrants. But in Verhoevens telling at least, they also shared an even deeper interest in profiting from the French Revolution: by selling land in America to French migrs, by plotting to help Girondin leaders reclaim Louisiana from the Spanish, and by servingsometimes in partnership as international smugglers, under the protection of the succeeding Jacobin regime. Barlow has generally been of interest to Americanist literary schol- ars for his career as a nationalist poet, and to historians for his role as an American diplomat, mostly in Paris, from the late 1790s to his death in 1812. Imlay has engaged literary historians almost entirely on the basis of the relationship he undertook, in Paris, with Mary Wollstonecraft, with whom he had a child, Fanny, in 1794. When Imlay abandoned Wollstone- craft a year later, she twice attempted suicide, the second time after having traveled to Scandinavia on Imlays commercial business. Neither Barlow nor Imlay enjoys an extraordinarily high literary reputation among schol- 574 } early american literature: volume 49, number 2 ars or students today. (Ill confess that Ive never been brave enough to teach Barlows poetry; I have had some success, though, teaching Imlays 1793 novel The Emigrantsusing the Penguin Classics edition edited by Verhoeven and Amanda Gilroy in 1998in a graduate seminar on trans- atlantic Revolutionary writing.) While neither biographer attempts to re- suscitate Barlows or Imlays literary standing, each does hope to counter- act the prevailing ways in which they have been handed down to us. For Buel, Barlow is best remembered not as a minor literary figure but as a writer of international renown for his vision of a republican future, one who epitomized the character of his time better than did many of its most prominent heroes (45). For Verhoeven, Imlay needs to be rescued from Wollstonecrafts shadow. In attempting to do so, Verhoeven takes great pains to demonstrate the broad influence of Imlays Topographical Description of the Western Terri- tory of North America (1792), which outsold The Emigrants by a handy mar- gin and, unlike the novel, went into multiple and vastly expanded editions, some of them pirated, as well as being plagiarized by other geographical writers. The book, Verhoeven argues, made a great impression on all those radical minds in Britain who considered their society to be hopelessly cor- rupt and their civil rights under serious threat from an outdated and des- potic government (148). It was seized upon by young British radicals including S. T. Coleridge, Robert Southey, Wollstonecraft, Joseph Priestley, and many of their peerswho sought the promise for a Rousseauesque return to nature in the pristine wilderness of the New World (148). Even as these claims suggest the need for scholars of the period to become better acquainted with Imlays two books, Verhoeven has bigger reasons for rec- ommending a study of Imlays life. He is, like Barlow and many of their American associates in Paris, a paradigmatic figure of his time. He belonged to that generation of Americans, born in the 1750s, whose lives were crucially shaped by revolutions in America and Francethe two historical events that sent cataclysmic shock- waves through the late eighteenth- century circum- atlantic world order and that, it is generally accepted, ushered in politi- cal modernity and marked the birth of the modern subject. (4) If Barlow and Imlay led similar lives, the biographies written by Buel and Verhoeven likewise resemble one another to a certain extent. One Review Essay: American Adventurers { 575 similarity in their construction is the extraordinary amount of archival work that has gone into each volume. Without doubt, these will remain the landmark works on these writers for a generation or more, and so all the better that the research is as exhaustive as it could possibly be. Both books make use of archival holdings on multiple continents, and both make spe- cial use of Archives des Affaires trangers and Archives Nationales in Paris to reconstruct Imlays and Barlows political and commercial inter- actions with French Revolutionary officials. One additional challenge Bar- lows biographers have all faced is that much of his correspondence with his wife while they lived in Europe was conducted in error- laden, archaic French, which they used to practice the language, and which is even harder to decipher than the maddening baby talk they used elsewhere in their correspondence.2 Verhoeven in particular has gone many extra archival miles, consulting collections in the United Kingdom and Spain, small re- positories all over the United States, and minor holdings in France, as well as tracking down Imlay family descendants for papers that helped him re- construct the familys history. Yet this thoroughness, while it lends extraordinary authority to these vol- umes, also makes both too detailed at times. Neither is a scintillating read, at least not until the drama of the Terror takes the action up a notch. And in spite of the fact that each biographerespecially Buelseems to be deeply identified with his subject, neither Imlay nor Barlow is very likeable, and Buels ultimate conviction of Barlows status as one of humanitys better angels (369) is hard to swallow in the face of the evidence Verhoeven and others have assembled of his deep and abiding self- interest and the shady origins of the personal fortune he accumulated while in Europe. Barlow also comes off, even in Buels book, as condescending to many around him, especially to his wife, Ruth. He seems to have fostered a bizarre emotional (and, as Buel acknowledges, possibly sexual) mnage  trois with his wife and the much younger artist and inventor Robert Fulton, precisely so he could offload some of his wifes emotional needs. Imlay we already con- sidered a cad; Verhoevens biography doesnt change this picture much, despite the biographers sometimes troubling sympathies with his subject. Verhoevens overidentification seems to bear out less in burnishing Imlays character than in an unfair meanness toward Wollstonecraft, who appears here as so psychotically attached to Imlay, heaping on him all her fanta- sies of financial security and pantisocratic utopianism, that his decision to 576 } early american literature: volume 49, number 2 abandon her seems almost understandable. (See esp. 18081; by contrast, Verhoeven never really speculates about Imlays own emotional states or motivations in quite the same way.) Do these books deliver on the promises (1) that their subjects warrant all this extended attention and (2) that they are especially valuable rep- resentatives of key forces governing the late- eighteenth- century Atlantic world? I think the answer to both questions is yes. For one, they make a compelling case for the contemporary influence each writer hadfar greater than their subsequent neglect would suggest. Barlows notoriety was such that Edmund Burke derided him in Parliament as the prophet Joel; it also earned him accolades from French leaders and entry into their revolutionary inner circles. Imlays The Emigrants, Verhoeven argues, should be credited alongside Thomas Holcrofts Anna St. Ives (1972) and William Godwins Caleb Williams (1794) with inaugurating the tradition of the Jacobin novel in Great Britain. His Topographical Description helped launch the British Jacobin obsession with the idyllic innocence of Ameri- can wilderness. But its perhaps precisely because these figures are somewhat minor that they are so valuable to study. In Verhoevens phrase, Imlay acted as an interface between figures of much greater historical significance (1). The same could be said of Barlow. As interfaces, they rubbed up against major figures of the Revolutionary Atlantic, who seem less to be nodal points on a network than major destinations in and of themselves. When he left for France in 1788, for instance, Barlow carried with him at least four letters of recommendation from George Washington, including one to Thomas Jefferson and another to General Lafayette, based only on his authorship of his epic poem Vision of Columbus and on one shared wartime dinner. When Imlay left London for Paris in early 1793 he carried a letter of rec- ommendation from Thomas Cooper, a radical Dissenter and son- in- law of Joseph Priestley, to the Girondin leader Jacques- Pierre Brissot de Warville. Barlow, it turns out, was translator (if a rather loose and jingoistic one) of Brissots New Travels in the United States, which had been printed in 1792 by Thomas Paines London publisher. In Paris, both men entered Paines circle and befriended prominent English expats and French intellectuals and political leaders. Barlow was granted citizenship in the new French Republic. He had probably already met Mary Wollstonecraft at her pub- lisher Joseph Johnsons salon in London, and in 1792 he and his wife began Review Essay: American Adventurers { 577 to cultivate a closer relationship with her, just as she began to gain notori- ety for her writings on the French Revolution and on womens rights. The Barlows proposed taking Wollstonecrafts younger brother, Charles, with them back to the United States. When they delayed their departure and Joel returned to Paris, Wollstonecraft, who had also traveled to France to wit- ness Revolutionary events firsthand, was instrumental in helping persuade Ruth to join them there. In April 1793, Joel wrote to Ruth that I believe [Wollstonecraft] has got a sweetheartand that she will finish by going with him to A[meric]a a wife. he is of Kentucky & a very sensible man (qtd. in Verhoeven 179; in Buel 16768). The interfacers had interfaced. In spite of all efforts to prevent it, once Barlow and Imlay meet, Woll- stonecraft does threaten to steal the show in both biographies. Buel devotes considerably less time to her presence in Barlows life than does Verhoeven (or for that matter Lyndall Gordon, the Wollstonecraft biographer to pay closest attention to her American acquaintances); and Verhoeven works so hard to pull Imlay out of Wollstonecrafts shadow that he allows her to surface only in the books final chapter. But in many ways its the Woll- stonecraft episode that best demonstrates the value of Imlay and Barlow as lenses for understanding the period. In their relationships with her they have their closest encounter with an English radical counterpart: a figure whose dramatic rise in station and influence occurred through the power of the political press and literary celebrity. Wollstonecraft also serves as a check on their American adventurer romantic self- conceptions, another of their shared characteristics. Wollstonecraft befriended the Barlows, but remained somewhat suspicious of Joel. She considered him devoured by ambition and was disgusted by the cold gallantry of his letters to Ruth (qtd. in Buel 152). She was especially skeptical once Barlow and Imlays commercial venturesblockade runningintensified under the Jacobin regime, though as Verhoeven demonstrates persuasively, she was probably privy to their shady silver smuggling, which provided the occasion for her travels in Scandinavia. More than Buel, Verhoeven offers explanations for these relationships that reach out to and help open up the intellectual and cultural worlds of the Revolutionary Atlantic. Although her biographers have tended to em- phasize her outspoken criticism of commerce, especially when it threat- ened to take Imlay away from her, Wollstonecrafts stance on this point, as Verhoeven demonstrates, was quite nuanced. Like other radicals, what 578 } early american literature: volume 49, number 2 Wollstonecraft rejected was speculation commerce, which promoted monopoly and private wealth, rather than commission commerce, which was seen as connecting the material progress of society with self- interest. Paine, for instance, argued in The Rights of Man that [c]ommerce is no other than the traffic of two individuals, multiplied on a scale of numbers; and by the same rule that nature intended the intercourse of two, she in- tended that of all (qtd. in Verhoeven 192). In Verhoevens account, Woll- stonecraft both sympathized with anticommercial agrarian radicals and resigned herself to the reality that commission commerce at least satisfied real human needs without depriving people of essential commodities and could even foster harmonious relations between individuals and nations (192). Such a hopethat financial solvency for Imlay might lead to happi- ness for her and an increase in their ability to contribute to radical literary politics, perhaps in Americamay have led her to sign off on the schemes Barlow and Imlay cooked up, resulting in her Scandinavian journey. The journey itself was not a success and her relationship with Imlay famously failed as well. Though her friendship with the Barlows seems to have soured at the same time, Joel wrote to Ruth from Algiers, where he was helping to negotiate the release of American captives, that she should check in on Wollstonecraft. Neither biography cites Joels instructions to Ruth, which appear in a letter that enclosed his will in case he died during his mission: Mary Woolstonecraft [sic],poor girl! you know her worth her virtues & her talents; and I am sure you will not fail to keep yourself informed of her circumstances. She has friends, or at least had them, more able than you will be to yield assistance in case of need. But they may forsake her for reasons which in your enlightened and benevolent mind would rather be an inducement to contribute to her happiness. Whatever the nature of their frustrated commercial relationship, Barlow offered this final word on the friendship by rendering Wollstonecraft a sen- timental object of Enlightened pity, a move William Godwin would also attempt, though unsuccessfully, a year later, when Wollstonecraft died fol- lowing the birth of her second daughter and Godwin, the childs father, published her biography. If Buel and, to a lesser extent, Verhoeven remain somewhat constrained by a conventional biographers hewing closely, and perhaps too sympa- Review Essay: American Adventurers { 579 thetically, to the individual subject, Philipp Ziesche demonstrates quite successfully in Cosmopolitan Patriots the rich possibilities these and other Americans in Paris during the French Revolution hold out to us for the practice of cultural or collective biography. Ziesches monograph also offers an intellectual history of Americans living in Paris during the 1790s, with close attention to their public and private language and the nuances of both political and social theory. The result is a survey of the French Revolution from the perspective of prominent American expatriates, from Thomas Jefferson and Gouverneur Morris in the opening chapters through Joel Barlow and James Monroe in the middle chapters to the breakdown of American relations with France during the XYZ affair of 1798 and the sometimes tense relations between Jeffersonian America and Napoleonic France in the first decade of the nineteenth century. Though he covers some of the same historical terrain as Yvon Bizardels The First Expatri- ates, Ziesche is less concerned than Bizardel with the day- to- day activi- ties of his subjects. Rather, he puts a biographical narrative strictly to the service of intellectual history and argues that by focusing attention on the political activities, correspondence, and publications of the Americans in Paris we can see that what he calls cosmopolitanismsometimes a syn- onym for universalismwas fundamental to the formation of American nationalism. In making this case, Ziesche counters the historical commonplace that American cosmopolitanism (registered in early enthusiasm for the French Revolution) fell victim to the rise of nationalism in France and America, which caused Americans to recoil from the French Revolutions spectacu- lar violence. He argues instead that cosmopolitanism and nationalism complemented one another in the 1790s by allowing the language of uni- versal human ideals to unite diverse populations within each country, and by allowing nations to define themselves by negotiating membership in an imagined society that subsumed nations. As Barlow put it in his Advice to the Privileged Orders in the Several States of Europe, published in London by Joseph Johnson in 1792, society exceeds national boundaries, and dif- ferent portions of this society . . . call themselves nations (qtd. in Ziesche 73). This is the cosmopolitanism referred to in Ziesches title. As Barlows friend Helen Maria Williams, a British expatriate in Paris, recalled about the early days of the Revolution: This was not a time when the distinctions of country were remembered (75). 580 } early american literature: volume 49, number 2 Although Ziesches study begins with Americans who were more prominent than BarlowJefferson and Morrisby the third chapter Bar- low has emerged as a chief theorist of the cosmopolitan nationalism this study asks us to consider, and he remains a major force in the book to the end. More thoroughly than Buel or Verhoeven, Ziesche helps make sense of Barlows major publications during his time in Europe, especially the four works published in 179293 and collected in a New York edition of his political works in 1796: the Letter to the National Convention, his Ad- vice to the Privileged Orders, the French edition (first published in English in 1795) of A Letter Addressed to the People of Piedmont, on the Advan- tages of the French Revolution, and the Necessity of Adopting Its Principles in Italy, and the violent poem The Conspiracy of Kings. Ziesche makes the case that these texts are extremely valuable to modern scholars seeking to understand the cultural contexts for American nationalism in the era of the French Revolution. Though Barlows writings lost him many friends among the Federalist circles to which he had once belonged at home, they resonated widely with supporters of the Revolution. They help us better understand the uneasy coexistence of multiple conceptions of the French Revolution, even in the thinking of supporters like Barlow: as an educa- tional Enlightenment project on one hand and as a martial force, set to Purge the earth of its tyrants, in Barlows phrase, on the other (qtd. in Ziesche 79). Despite the events of the Terror having instilled in Barlow a deep aversion to violence and warfare, he never surrendered his basic faith in the regenerative force of democratic revolution: its ability to constitute the people as republican citizens rather than monarchical subjects. As Ziesches final chapters bear out, the beautiful friendship that had existed between American and French Revolutionaries came to an abrupt end during the Quasi- War with France of 17981800, though he insists that Barlow and most other American cosmopolitans in Paris didnt aban- don their universalist ideals. Rather, after Jeffersons presidential victory in 1800, they revived their earlier interests in Louisianaa territory Bar- low and Imlay had both long fantasized about colonizingand transferred their hopes to a westward- expanding American nation. Sentiment toward America in France also shifted following the negotiation of the Jay Treaty with Britain in 1795, which reopened Americas commercial relationship with London. But French observers complained too, starting middecade, about the scandalous commerce carried on by a growing number of Review Essay: American Adventurers { 581 American merchants in Paris (124). Ziesche does not consider Barlows fi- nancial activities in nearly the same detail as Buel and Verhoeven, and like Buel he remains convinced of Barlows basic goodness to the end. But Ver- hoevens book would invite us to consider whether American adventurers like Imlay and Barlow might have been among or at least similar to those American strangers reported on by the Central Bureau of Police and the Ministry of the Interior in late 1796 as engage[d] in the most flagrant agio- tage, a term Ziesche glosses as greed, usury, war profiteering, and para- sitic and unpatriotic behavior (125). If Barlows early writing and oratory on the Revolution brought him into favor with the early leaders of the Revolution, and the blockade running he did with the blessing of the Jaco- bin regime kept him alive after his Girondin friends had gone to the guil- lotine, his financial ambitionshared by manycontributed to the grow- ing French antipathy toward American expatriates during the reign of the Directory. That Barlow retained his confidence in the ideals of the French Revolution only estranged him further from former associates at home and prevented him from returning until Jefferson had assumed the presidency. Barlow once wrote to Jefferson that in order to form a proper judg- ment [of the French Revolution] it is necessary to combine many circum- stances that cannot be well understood by men out of the country (qtd. in Ziesche 80). His argument in favor of eyewitness, but also of displacement, is borne out by these books. The experiences of American expatriates do yield important insights into the earliest processes of American national- ism. Surely the current transnational turn in Americanist historiography is responsible for the rise in the number of studies of expatriate radicals, adventurers, and cosmopolitans like Barlow and Imlay. What we need now are works less invested in recuperating reputation and even more attuned to how such mobile and migrating figures belong to cultural, intellectual, and literary histories of which the American and French Revolutions are only a part. notes 1. In addition to the works under review here, see recent books by Cayton; Cotlar; and Giles; and articles by Jourdan and Funchion. 2. Cantor includes translations of some of these letters that are more reliable than those in Todd, but neither selection is exhaustive. 582 } early american literature: volume 49, number 2 works cited Barlow, Joel. Letter to Ruth Barlow. 8 July 1796. MS. Barlow Papers. Houghton Lib., Harvard University, Cambridge. Bizardel, Yvon. The First Expatriates: Americans in Paris during the French Revolution. 1972. Trans. June P. Wilson and Cornelia Higginson. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1975. Cantor, Milton. A Connecticut Yankee in a Barbary Court: Joel Barlows Algerian Letters to His Wife, William and Mary Quarterly 3rd ser. 19.1 (1962): 86109. Cayton, Andrew. Love in the Time of Revolution: Transatlantic Literary Radicalism and Historical Change, 17931818. Chapel Hill: U of North Carolina P, 2013. Cotlar, Seth. Tom Paines America: The Rise and Fall of Transatlantic Radicalism in the Early Republic. Charlottesville: U of Virginia P, 2011. Funchion, John. Reading Less Littorally: Kentucky and the Translocal Imagination in the Atlantic World. Early American Literature 48.1 (2013): 6191. Giles, Paul. Transatlantic Insurrections: British Culture and the Formation of American Literature, 17301860. Philadelphia: U of Pennsylvania P, 2001. Gordon, Lyndall. Vindication: A Life of Mary Wollstonecraft. New York: Harper Perennial, 2006. Jourdan, Annie. A Tale of Three Patriots in a Revolutionary World: Theophile Cazenove, Jacques- Pierre Brissot, and Joel Barlow (17881811). Early American Studies 10.2 (2012): 36081. Lepore, Jill. The Story of America: Essays on Origins. Princeton: Princeton UP, 2012. Todd, Charles L. Life and Letters of Joel Barlow, LL.D., Poet, Statesman, Philosopher. New York: Putnam, 1886. Notes on Contributors { 625 tion of the Antebellum North will be published by University of Michigan Press in July 2014. laUren klein is an assistant professor in the School of Literature, Media, and Com- munication at the Georgia Institute of Technology. She has been recently awarded fellowships at the American Antiquarian Society and the Library Company of Philadelphia to conduct research for a new book on the cultural history of data visualization. betsy klimasmith is an associate professor and Graduate Program director in the English Department at the University of Massachusetts, Boston. She will edit a new edition of Kelroy for Broadview Press and is completing a book on novels and early city culture in the United States. michelle craig mcdonald is an associate professor and chair of the Department of History at Richard Stockton College. She is the author, most recently, of Pub- lic Drinking in the Early Modern World: Voices from the Tavern, 15001800, with David Hancock, published by Pickering & Chatto (2011). She is working on a his- tory of US investment in the Caribbean coffee industry, under contract with the University of Pennsylvania Press. andrew r. mUrphy is an associate professor of political science at Rutgers Univer- sity, New Brunswick, and director of the Walt Whitman Center for the Culture and Politics of Democracy. He is the author of Prodigal Nation: Moral Decline and Divine Punishment from New England to 9/11 (Oxford UP, 2008) and Con- science and Community: Revisiting Toleration and Religious Dissent in Early Mod- ern England and America (Penn State UP, 2001). He is the editor of The Political Writings of William Penn (Liberty Fund, 2002) and The Blackwell Companion to Religion and Violence (Wiley- Blackwell, 2011) and coeditor, with David S. Gutter- man, of Religion, Politics, and American Identity: New Directions, New Controver- sies (LexingtonRowman and Littlefield, 2006). He is currently finishing a study of the political thought of William Penn. james p. myers, jr., is professor emeritus of English at Gettysburg College. His latest book- length publication is The Ordeal of Thomas Barton: Anglican Missionary in the Pennsylvania Backcountry, 17551780 (Lehigh UP, 2010). Currently, he is re- searching the interconnections among literature, landscape painting, and cartog- raphy, and is writing a study of Michel- Guillaume- Jean de Crevcoeur. bryan waterman is an associate professor of English at New York University and visiting associate professor of literature at NYU Abu Dhabi. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.