238 } EARLY AMERICAN LITERATURE: VOLUME 50, NUMBER 1 ary value revealed the nationalism of post World War II literary criticism, Parrishs transatlantic contextualization of literary value reflects the global emphasis of our own literary historical moment. To perceive [Beverleys] experience of the world and the reasons he constructed his History the way he did, she writes, one must place Beverley within an imperial transatlan- tic geography rather than a protonationalist American one (xi). In reading this excellent introduction, I occasionally craved further dis- cussion of how Beverleys Edenic rhetorichis perpetuation of the myth of inexhaustible natural resourcesmight be situated within an older tra- dition of promotional writing. I would also have found interesting a more thorough discussion of the reception history of Beverleys book. That said, there is no question that Susan Scott Parrishs new edition of The History and Present State of Virginia is not only very fine work but also a substan- tial and welcome contribution to the cognate fields of colonial American history and early American literary studies. Thanks to Parrishs painstaking work and the support of the Omohundro Institute of Early American His- tory and Culture, we now have a reliable scholarly edition of a book that has the distinction of having being written by a native- born Virginian who was both buoyed and buffeted by the vital currents that circulated through the early eighteenth- century transatlantic world. MIChAEL P. BRANCh University of Nevada, Reno Book of Ages: The Life and Opinions of Jane Franklin JILL LEPORE New York: Knopf, 2013 442 pages. Ring the bells that still can ring. Forget your perfect offering. There is a crack in everything. Its how the light gets in. Leonard Cohen, Anthem (1992) So reads the epigraph to John Demoss The Unredeemed Captive: A Family Story from Early America (1994), which focuses on the captivi- Book Reviews { 239 ties of the eminent Puritan divine John Williams, who eventually returned to Massachusetts from Canada after his ordeal, and his daughter Eunice, who did not. While John recounted his experiences in The Redeemed Cap- tive Returning to Zion (1707), Eunice converted to Catholicism, married a Kahnawake man, and forgot how to speak English: she was the unre- deemed captive. John Demos and Jill Lepore are among the best- known narrative historians of early America, but they share another connection. Demos taught Lepore, and from her first book, The Name of War (1998), to her latest, Book of Ages (2013), she too peers through the dim crevices of history to illuminate and dignify the hitherto lost lives of everyday people. In this case, Lepore privileges Benjamin Franklins favorite but little- known sister, Jane, and alchemically transforms her hardscrabble life of poverty, child rearing, and instability into something precious. The letters that passed between them throughout their lives, augmented by a range of supporting artifacts and newly recovered material, provide a strong sense of her voice, beliefs, and personality. Jane was not very well schooled, but she read as much as she could and pondered public and private matters. Hence the books subtitle, The Life and Opinions of Jane Franklin. Jane was the youngest of seven girls and Benjamin the youngest of ten boys born to Josiah Franklin and his first and second wives, Ann and Abigail. Brother and sister were devoted to each other (the family referred to them as Benny and Jenny) and Benjamin taught Jane to love reading and writing. But she married a neer- do- well, Edward Mecom, at fifteen and spent de- cades caring for him, her children, and her ailing parents, as well as several grandchildren and even great- grandchildren, while Benjamin left home to find his fortune. Yet despite their radically different lives, they remained extremely close. In the end, they were the only ones left, having outlived their spouses and siblings; Jane outlived most of her twelve children too. Throughout his life, Benjamin found ways to assist Jane. He encouraged her to write (most girls were taught to read but not necessarily to write), he sent her money and books, he helped her children, and in his will he be- queathed her the house she was living in, which he owned, and an annual income of fifty pounds (29, 227). Both Demos and Lepore contribute to a rich store of narrative that is especially concerned with recovering the marginalized, the muted, and the masked, such as women, persons of color, and the working classes. In order to do so, they often need to use unconventional historical evi- 240 } EARLY AMERICAN LITERATURE: VOLUME 50, NUMBER 1 dence and innovative storytelling techniques. For some, narrative history remains problematical because it smacks too much of the fictional and the frivolous, instead of the factual and the weighty. Yet in addition to a steady stream of books, the discipline now boasts a book series and a journal all its own: New Directions in Narrative History from Yale University Press, edited by Demos and Aaron Sachs, and The Appendix, which appeared on- line in December 2012 and which describes itself as a quarterly journal of experimental and narrative history (see http://theappendix.net). Lepore herself has reflected on historiography in publications and pre- sentations for general readers as well as academics. She is, for example, a regular contributor to The New Yorker and published a fascinating essay there on the links between history and fiction, Just the Facts, Maam (Mar. 24, 2008). Tracing the rise of fiction and the evolution of historical writ- ing, she refers to the eighteenth- century British novelist Henry Fielding: For Fielding, there are two kinds of historical writing: history based in fact (whose truth is founded in documentary evidence), and history based in fiction (whose truth is founded in human nature) (Just the Facts 81). Paradoxically, the latter sometimes reveals more than the former. As Tim OBrien memorably puts it in his semiautobiographical short story collec- tion, The Things They Carried, I want you to know why story- truth is truer sometimes than happening- truth (179). Lepore goes on to point out the fallacy of the factual: since histories have arbitrary beginnings and ends, they are inherently incomplete; since historians always write from their own viewpoint, they are unavoidably subjective; and since primary information is inert and cannot be revivi- fied by its original producers, it is clearly unreliable. She therefore con- cludes that fiction can do what history doesnt but should: it can tell the story of ordinary people (Just the Facts 82). She elaborates further in Methods and Sources, appendix A of Book of Ages, This book is a his- tory, a biography, but, in the spirit of the age in which Jane lived, it bor- rows from the conventions of fiction (269). However, despite her attempts in the book to call attention to the conventions of different kinds of writ- ing about lives history, biography, autobiography, and fiction, she argues that Jane Franklins life doesnt fit neatly into any one of those genres. Nor do most lives (270). In other words, almost all lives are complex, even humble ones. But Lepore certainly does not advocate a wishy- washy kind of historical Book Reviews { 241 storytelling. In Historical Writing and the Revival of Narrative, an ad- dress given at the Nieman Narrative Journalism Conference back in 2001, she draws on the comments of British historian Lawrence Stone, who as- serted that the best narrative history should be guided by a pregnant prin- ciple. Such work moves beyond exposition to a cohesive, regenerative interpretation of the data provided. It bonds narrative power with ana- lytical rigor. She also references the comments of Peter Burke, a historian at Cambridge, concerning the anthropological technique of thick descrip- tion. Historical thick narrativesmicrohistoriessimultaneously weave together an individuals story with historical context. As she admits, this is no easy task. Indeed, given the many obstacles and omissions Lepore faced in writ- ing Book of Ages, she sometimes despaired that she would ever be able to do justice to Janes story, and she even abandoned the project for a while (269). Simply finding facts about Jane was difficult, considering, for ex- ample, that Ben kept none of her letters for the first three decades of their sixty- three- year correspondence even though she kept his. Interviewed by Diane Rehm on National Public Radio, Lepore likens this disparity to having one shoe and trying to walk (http://thedianerehmshow.org /shows/201311 18). In order to find enough evidence to avoid a severe dis- cursive limp, Lepore had to get creative. And she did. The resulting book not only brings Jane to life but provides a meditation on silence in the ar- chives (269). To flesh out Janes story, Lepore uses a variety of source material in- cluding Janes Book of Ages, a sixteen- page foolscap booklet where she recorded her twelve childrens births and deaths, public records, news- papers, genealogical data, and a tabulation of the books Jane read or owned throughout her life. Lepores strategies in utilizing this information are also innovative. For example, she admits to constructing as dialogue some of the letters the brother and sister exchanged, and she says that occasion- ally, adapting chronological fidelity to her own ends, she used a later letter of Janes to describe events during an earlier time frame. Lepore adopts other ways to contextualize Janes life, too. Take, for ex- ample, the explanatory sections on aspects of eighteenth- century culture that pertain to the people in her book. Speculating on why Janes husband was constantly in debt, Lepore explores the function of paper credit in the eighteenth century. Discussing Janes ornate lettering in capitalizing the 242 } EARLY AMERICAN LITERATURE: VOLUME 50, NUMBER 1 title nouns of her birth and death registry, Book of Ages, Lepore points out that the lavish, calligraphic letter B and the graceful, slender, art- ful A are written in the Italian style known as the Flourishing Alpha- bet (49). That observation leads to a discussion of contemporary writ- ing manuals, which could have been where Jane encountered this kind of lettering. Lepore observes that these two letters were not written in Janes usual hand; they are unlike any other samples of her writing and bestow formality and importance on the contents of her little booklet. Other topics require more detailed examination: for example, the places where Lepore contemplates whether Janes family suffered from tuberculosis and par- ticularly whether the disease caused or exacerbated mental illness, which affected Janes husband and several of her children (12026). Another contextualizing technique involves Lepores description of other Janes who act as foils to Jane Franklin. In chapter 6, she contrasts Jane Franklins restricted educational opportunities with the fortunes of Jane Colman Turell, daughter of the minister of the church where Jane Franklins uncle worshipped. Jane Colman Turell composed poems and hymns which were published after her premature death; whereas Jane Franklin Mecoms only literary remains were her Book of Ages and a few other documents riddled with misspellings and colloquialisms. Lepore observes that Jane wrote to her brother Benjamin assuming the same role that Jane Colman Turell used when she wrote to her fatheras a student writes to a tutorthereby making an apt connection between the two female contemporaries (28). In chapter 38, Lepore describes how a young Jane Austen compiled her parody of English history but later went on to write sophisticated novels. In the eighteenth century, she writes, history and fiction split. Benjamin Franklins life entered the annals of history; lives like his sisters became the subject of fiction. Histories of great men, novels of little women (241). Book of Ages, of course, provides the history of a little woman. Lepore uses yet another Jane, Lady Jane Grey, to open her book as a way to comment on women who loved reading and writing (as did Jane Franklin Mecom). Lady Jane Grey, the grandniece of Henry the Eighth, became queen for nine days and was then overthrown and executed. Segue to the village of Ecton, Northamptonshire, where a daughter, Jane, was born to Thomas Francklyne in 1565 but died within a month. Thomas and his wife then had four sons, one of whom was Henry, the grandfather of Book Reviews { 243 Benjamin and Jane Franklin (the spelling of the name had changed over the years) (38). While the links may sound tenuous in my summary, rest assured that Lepore makes the connections far more convincingly and ele- gantly. Going back historically to a point that only superficially seems re- moved from the topic at hand is a further tool in the narrative historians arsenal. Its use reinforces the notion of a continuum of causes, effects, and connections and dramatizes the difficulty of ascribing any definitive begin- ning point to a project. I see it as a historical analogue to intertextuality. Organizing so much disparate material must have been challenging, yet for readers the end result is easy to follow. The book divides into five main parts, Jane, Her Book, Letters, History, and Remains, with the last third of the volume given over to seven appendixes. They focus mostly on Jane but also on historians of the Franklin family, starting with Lepore herself (her section on Methods and Sources is fascinating), and include scholars from previous academic generations such as Jared Sparks and Carl Van Doren. In my view, the appendixes are not traditional add- ons. Because of the evidentiary spaces in Lepores project, these later sec- tions aptly fill in material that she did not have room to detail earlier, such as more on Janes reading in Janes Library (appendix F) and information on the Franklin and Mecom families in A Franklin Genealogy and A Jane Genealogy (appendixes B and C). Within the books main portion, Lepore effortlessly interlaces the biographies of Jane and Benjamin, analy- sis of their writings, and contextual data. Also scattered throughout Book of Ages is a series of illustrations. If you look at the table of contents, you will not see them itemized in a separate illustrations list because they are such an integral part of the text. In addition to adopting a reader- friendly organization for her book, Lepore writes in an engaging, impassioned, and sometimes lyrical style. The following extract that tries to convey Janes exhaustion in rearing her young children is a particularly good example: Her days were days of flesh: the little legs and little arms, the little hands, clutched around her neck, the softness. Her days were days of toil: swad- dling and nursing the baby, washing and dressing the boys, scrubbing everyones faces, answering everyones cries, feeding everyones hunger, cleaning everyones waste. She taught her children to read. She made sure they learned to write better than she did. (66) 244 } EARLY AMERICAN LITERATURE: VOLUME 50, NUMBER 1 Does Book of Ages have any faults? Not for me. I can see, however, that some readers could take exception to the very enterprise of writing a biog- raphy when the data are so limited, because the historian inevitably fills in some blanks with conjecture. I think this would only be a problem if the writer overgeneralized, drew hasty conclusions, or made definitive state- ments. Instead, Lepore takes great care to make unreliability or suggestion overt. She is honest about uncertainty even as she furnishes circumstantial evidence to support her arguments. In Poor Richards Almanack for 1838, Benjamin Franklin quipped, Read much, but not many Books. Lepores volume is one you should read. Painstakingly researched, well argued, deftly organized, remarkably com- prehensive, and beautifully written, Book of Ages casts light on the famous and the forgotten alike as well as the gendered society that produced both a Benjamin and a Jane Franklin. KAThRYN ZABELLE DEROUNIAN- STODOLA University of Arkansas at Little Rock Biography and the Black Atlantic Edited by LISA A. LINDSAY and JOhN WOOD SWEET Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2014 370 pp. The two parts of this volumes title would seem to pose the prob- lem of critical redundancy. Biography and the Black Atlantic have been critically entwined with one another for quite some time. Paul Gilroys in- fluential formulation, in which racial identities are structured on mobility and cultural exchange (routes as opposed to roots), has informed the burgeoning scholarship on black life writing, written or related, during the long eighteenth century. The study of the early Black Atlantic has prolifer- ated over the past decade to the point where Olaudah Equiano and Phillis Wheatley are no longer the only household names in the literary and his- torical canon. It includes many other black subjects whose textual lives in journals, memoirs, spiritual and conversion narratives, letters, and lyric poetry, among other genresnow appear in scholarly editions and an- thologies. These texts constitute the backbone of the early Black Atlantic. 296 } earlY american literature: Volume 50, number 1 Environment and cofounder and series coeditor of the University of Virginia P book series Under the Sign of Nature: Explorations in Ecocriticism (twenty- eight titles to date). He has published more than 150 articles, essays, and reviews, as well as five books, including Reading the Roots: American Nature Writing before Walden (U of Georgia P, 2004). christine delucia is assistant professor of history at Mount Holyoke College. Her writing has appeared in the Journal of American History, Studies in American Indian Literatures, and Common- place. She is completing her first book manu- script, on violence, memory, and place in the Northeast after King Philips War, for Yale University Press. kathrYn zabelle derounian- stodola, professor emeritus, University of Arkan- sas at Little Rock, publishes on captivity narratives and early American womens writings. Her most recent book (coedited with Carrie R. Zeman) is A Thrilling Narrative of Indian Captivity: Dispatches from the Dakota War (U of Nebraska P, 2012). In fall 2014, Studies in American Culture printed her article Ann Eliza Young: A Star on the Nineteenth- Century American Lecture Circuit. From 2003 to 2005, she was president of the Society of Early Americanists. wai chee dimock is William Lampson Professor of English and American Studies at Yale University. She has published widely on American literature of every period, from Anne Bradstreet on, and is best known for Through Other Continents: Ameri- can Literature across Deep Time (Princeton UP, 2007). She was a consultant for Invitation to World Literature, a thirteen- part series produced by WGBH and aired on PBS in 2010. She now writes movie reviews for the Los Angeles Review of Books. Her online teaching includes a lecture course, Hemingway, Fitzgerald, Faulk- ner, available from Open Yale Courses, and a new teaching initiative, American Literature in the World, http://amlitintheworld.commons.yale.edu/, http://www .amlitintheworld.commons.yale.edu, http://amlitintheworld.commons.yale.edu/, featuring course material from several classes, an annual graduate conference, a digital lab, and a Web- and- print anthology. Her essay on Rowlandson, Erd- rich, and Alexie is chapter 1 of her new book, Weak Theory: Networks, Low Bar, Switchable Genres. hilarY emmett is lecturer in American literature and director of teaching and learning in the School of American Studies at the University of East Anglia. She also authors essays on early American and contemporary Australian literature. As an Australian scholar of American literature based in the United Kingdom, she is particularly interested in the pedagogy of comparative American studies. simon gikandi is Robert Schirmer Professor of English at Princeton University and editor of PMLA, the official journal of the Modern Language Association (MLA). He is the author of many books and articles including Writing in Limbo: Mod- ernism and Caribbean Literature and Maps of Englishness: Writing Identity in the Culture of Colonialism. His latest book, Slavery and the Culture of Taste (Prince- ton UP, 2011), was cowinner of the James Russell Lowell Prize for an outstand- Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.