{ 665 Slavery and To Mrs. Eliot on the Death of Her Child Two New Manuscript Poems Connected to Phillis Wheatley by the Bostonian Poet Ruth Barrell Andrews A commonplace book containing two previously unknown poems connected to Phillis Wheatley is a significant recent discovery that sheds fresh light on Wheatleys reception and participation in the local manuscript culture of Boston. The poems, entitled Slavery and To Mrs. Eliot on the Death of Her Child, reveal that poetic coteries in Boston, and specific manuscript poets in particular, were more active in Wheatleys career than has been understood. This essay introduces the lately uncov- ered poet Ruth Barrell Andrews (17491831) and two of her poems that re- late directly to Wheatley. Ruth Barrell Andrews wrote the poem Slavery at a crucial junction in Phillis Wheatleys career: on December 1, 1772, while Wheatleys manu- script was en route to London. With the encouragement of friends, one of whom might well have been Andrews, the determined Wheatley had just pulled her fledgling subscription drive from the local printer in Bos- ton and set her sights on the more prestigious London press. Just weeks earlier, Wheatley had secured the necessary documentation she needed to ensure her manuscripts publication in London, which included an attesta- tion to confirm her authorship signed by the elite men of Boston. A flurry of activity to promote the sable muse and secure the Countess of Hunting- don as her patron had already begun, and supporters at home were anx- ious to see the poems in print. John Andrews, a Boston lawyer and Ruths husband, had already expressed impatience earlier that spring with the doomed Boston printing. In a letter to Ruths brother, the Philadelphian merchant William Barrell, John complained, Its above two months since wendy raphael roberts University at Albany, SUNY 666 } early aMerICan lIteratUre: VolUMe 51 , nUMber 3 I subscribed for Philliss poems, which I expected to have sent you long ago, but the want of Spirit to carry on any thing of the kind here has pre- vented it, as they are not yet publishd (May 29, 1772). In contrast to this want of Spirit in her local Bostonians, the well- connected poet Ruth Barrell Andrews was subsequently inspired to promote and to celebrate Wheatleys book, as well as to proclaim the meaning of its imminent pub- lication. The discovery of Andrewss poem Slavery is particularly important because it inverts the story of Wheatleys success that scholars have often told through documents authored by her male supporters. Because the oft- cited correspondence concerning Wheatleys forthcoming volume of poetry took place between two men close to Ruth Barrell Andrews, John Andrews and William Barrell, her own significant role has been over- looked. However, apparently at least one woman in the background of their letters was much more important to the story than has been under- stood. Following Joanna Brookss research, which effectively established that Wheatley made her career not by securing a single endorsement by powerful men, but by cultivating an intricate network of relationships among white women, one might well expect that at least one of these white women who had judged Wheatleys verse favorably and circulated it widely would have publicly claimed some stake in the poets approaching success (78).1 Andrewss poem Slavery, which survives in a manuscript volume of her poetry at the Boston Public Library, as well as in a hand- written copy made by her nephew at the Massachusetts Historical Society, seems to have done just that.2 The fact that Andrews authored the poem is no small matter. Though her verse, which seems to have been primarily, if not exclusively, in manu- script, has been unknown to literary scholars until now, it was well known to the upper echelon of Boston, as she was the sister to several successful merchants, including one of the citys wealthiest, Joseph Barrell. More im- portantly, she descended from a family of esteemed Boston writers. Ruth Barrell Andrews was the daughter of Ruth Green Barrell, a poet in her own right, whose brother, the rum distiller Joseph Green, was the archpoet of the tavern literati and the most celebrated wit of Boston. Ruth Green Bar- rell, along with her husband, John Barrell, a successful rum merchant, was part of Joseph Greens poetic inner circle.3 Andrews actively participated in the poetic culture of this well- known Two New Manuscript Poems { 667 family of versifiers. For instance, she bantered with her brother Joseph in verse just as her mother had with her own sibling Joseph Green. At least once, Andrews engaged in a poetic exchange with her famous uncle Green, who praised her work.4 She encouraged her favorite niece Fanny, about whom she wrote several poems, when the young girl started writing poetry at an early age (Poems 104). Later in life, Andrews drew inspiration from the encouragement of her nephew Theodore Barrell, Jr., also regarded as a talented writer by relatives (Letter to Theodore). The literary culture of the family continued to flourish with many in the next generation of the Barrell family pursuing their literary ambitions, the most famous being Andrewss niece Sally Sayward Barrell Keating Wood, a prolific fiction writer know as Madame Wood, Maines first novelist.5 The subsequent generation in- cluded the minister and prolific abolitionist George Barrell Cheever, who published widely, including posthumous poems. Collected papers of the various Barrell family members show continued production of manuscript poetry by women well into the nineteenth century.6 Given the familys activity and status in the poetic manuscript culture of Boston, it would be remarkable if they did not take an active interest in Wheatley, especially since Andrews and her family had direct contact with her. Andrewss manuscript volume, which covers the period 1770 to 1788, features a network of friendships and familial relations that place her within close social proximity to the Wheatley family. First, her uncle Green was married at Philliss Old South Church. In 1771, Rev. John Lathrop, minister of Second Church, officiated at Ruth Barrells marriage to John Andrews, and he himself married Mary Wheatley, the daughter of Susanna and John Wheatley, and Philliss unofficial tutor. Perhaps most signifi- cantly, after Mary Wheatleys passing, Rev. Lathrop married in 1780 Ruth Barrell Andrewss best friend, Elizabeth Checkley (referred to as Betsy), the granddaughter of Rev. Samuel Checkley, the pastor of Susanna and John Wheatleys congregation. Additionally, Ruths brother Joseph, who engaged her in belletristic banter, married Hannah Fitch three months after Phillis was baptizedboth events officiated by Rev. Samuel Cooper. Hannahs father, Timothy Fitch, owned the ship that brought Phillis to Boston and which had become her namesake. Just this brief survey of the Barrell family confirms multiple points of contact with Wheatley that here- tofore had been more speculative. Additionally, the discovery of Andrewss poetic interest in Wheatley 668 } early aMerICan lIteratUre: VolUMe 51 , nUMber 3 adds to the current understanding of Wheatleys manuscript circulation. For instance, Brooks has already brought to scholarly attention Andrewss circulation of Wheatleys elegy on Charles Eliot, son of Andrewss sister, Elizabeth Barrell Eliot. But now that Andrewss poetic interest in Wheatley has been shown to be much deeper, it is almost certain that she shared other Wheatley poems with the Eliot family. While it was already known that Andrews was connected to the Belknap family through her sister Elizabeths marriage to Samuel Eliot, brother of Ruth Eliot, who married Jeremy Belknap, little had been extracted from this connection. Given that it is now certain that Andrews exchanged poetry with her uncle Joseph Green, and given that Andrewss sister Elizabeth Barrell Eliot is the sister- in- law of Ruth Eliot Belknap, Jeremy Belknaps copy of Wheatleys earliest known verse likely came through either Andrews or one of these familial correspondents.7 More remarkably, the disclosure of Ruth Barrell Andrewss poetic claim in Wheatley broadens the likely field of Wheatleys poetic mentors. Though scholars often cite Mather Byles as Wheatleys primary literary mentor, Joseph Green, who signed Wheatleys attestation along with Byles, was just as well known in Boston, and more highly regarded for dominating the manuscript scene with his erudition and poetic wit. While Wheatleys pub- lished volume clearly shows Byless influence, Greens impact on Wheatley, especially in manuscript, deserves further attention than it has received thus far, as does the possible effect of Ruth Green Barrell. The paramount implication of Andrewss verse, however, is that until now there has been no written evidence that pointed to a specific young, white woman poet who mentored Wheatley. The fact that Andrews often encouraged other young female poets increases the likelihood that she took an active inter- est in Wheatley. This discovery will not only help scholars explore a larger breadth of Wheatleys poetic world but also help clarify how Wheatley negotiated some of these poetic relationships. One of the most noteworthy parts of this relationship with Andrews was how quickly the mentee became a catalyst to her likely mentor. In 1770, the same year that Wheatley achieved international fame with her elegy for George Whitefield, Andrews began her manuscript volume of poetry graced with the neatly scripted title page POEMS, Interspersed with PROSE, 1770, followed by a complete table of contents. The book does not contain Andrewss name, but the many nominal references in the Two New Manuscript Poems { 669 verse identified her to those in her society. The design of the commonplace book in this way points to a poet with literary ambitions and a sense of her role in the local coterie. Wheatleys local fame may well have encouraged Andrews to begin her manuscript volume, just as Wheatleys transatlantic hit, the Whitefield elegy, had served as a springboard for Jane Dunlaps print volume.8 A year later, Wheatley again inspired her likely mentor to action. At the same time that Wheatley had begun to press her plight as a slave more explicitly in verse, Andrews was emboldened to make similar political claims. Just two months before Wheatleys verse was shipped to England, Thomas Wooldridge made his visit to the Wheatley household to authenti- cate Wheatley as a poet for the abolitionist sympathizer Lord Dartmouth. The poem that Wheatley addressed to Lord Dartmouth in 1772 was ar- guably one of her most forcefully political to dateit candidly connects Wheatleys love of Freedom to her own experience as a slave. Though Andrews was not present for this poetic encounter, she most certainly heard about it soon thereafter. And it most likely struck a chord with her, given that Wooldridge, like many in the Barrell family, was a merchant with business between London, British North America, and the British West Indies. While Wheatleys manuscript traveled to a London trans- formed by the Somerset case, in which Lord Mansfield ruled that English common law did not support slavery, Andrews staked the earliest known claim in verse on the antislavery meaning of Wheatleys published vol- ume.9 Why did Andrews seize this moment to write her only known state- ment against slavery, and to what extent did it matter that she did? The available evidence suggests that whatever poetic relationship ex- isted between Andrews and Wheatley was a complicated one. Andrews may have promoted Wheatleys poetry and at least a version of her po- litical vision in part because Andrews wanted to ride on Wheatleys coat- tails. The correspondence between John Andrews and William Barrell re- veals that Andrews had sought her brothers attention for her poems and had lost it to Wheatley. John explains to William on September 22, 1772, that Andrews refused to send along her own elegy on their recently de- ceased nephew, Charles Eliot, and, instead, enclosed only Wheatleys elegy: The 3rd Instant I wrote by the post acquainting you with the death of little Charles, Ruthy has inclosd you by this opp: a Poem by P. Wheatly 670 } early aMerICan lIteratUre: VolUMe 51 , nUMber 3 addressd to your father on this melancholly occasion, wch I think is a masterly performance, but dont know whether youll be able to read it, as it was transcribd by Leveritt, who is but a bungling hand at any thing. Ruthys muse inspird her likewise & producd a very pretty, affectionate performance address to her sister, but being anticipated by the former, wch she thot much preferable to her own, (tho by the way I dont think it was, when viewd in the connection it was wrote, as it would not admit of that flowery language that runs through ye whole of Philliss) it was with difficulty that I could prevail on her to send it also, nor could I ob- tain a coppy by any means to send you, as she says you neglected taking any notice of some performance in poetry she formerly sent you. This brief mention of Andrewss reaction points to her own recognition of her irrelevance next to Wheatley. Perhaps this is what motivated Andrews to declare Wheatleys merits and her poetrys implications for slavery in no uncertain terms. The correspondence between John and William also points to a com- petitive though collaborative relationship between the two women poets which one would expect from writers in the same coterie. Seeing the emo- tional effect of Philliss exceptional talent on his wife, John makes the point of defending why he thinks Ruths poem is the better composition: Ruths elegy highlights its familial connection while Philliss emphasizes her role as the sublime poet. Johns assessment that the most substantial difference between the two poems is their respective circuits of address, which entail the use of direct versus flowery language, is an accurate analysis. Apart from this, the elegies are quite similar, which suggests some type of col- laboration. Wheatley, who made a habit of responding elegiacally immedi- ately, beat Andrews to the task by one day. When Andrews saw Wheatleys elegy, she may have responded by remaking it to emphasize a familial ad- dress. Another equally plausible scenario is that the two poets consulted each other on the subject and the basic narrative before attempting their separate compositions. Neither of these possibilities would have been un- usual among manuscript poets.10 In such a poetic relationship, it would seem strange if a fellow poet did not comment on the other poets success or failure. For example, Joseph Green famously mocked his friend Mather Byles for his aspirations of transatlantic fame. When Wheatleys book manuscript made its way across Two New Manuscript Poems { 671 the Atlantic toward a possible London publication, Andrews recognized it as an opportune moment. Since the Mansfield decision had struck a severe blow to slavery that summer, the barbaric institution seemed on the verge of crumbling in England. As David Waldstreicher has so elegantly pointed out, this was a decisive time in England and Americathe beginning of the Mansfieldian or Wheatleyan moment, when leading whites were forced to respond to the art and politics of slaves and their allies (522). For an amalgam of reasons, perhaps beyond the historians ability to parse out, the white poet Andrews proactively attempted to shape the reception of Wheatleys volume in this conversation. While the reception and impact of the poem Slavery is uncertain, Andrewss poetic volume undeniably circulated at least among her poetic coterie in Boston, as well as exchanged hands in Philadelphia, New York, and possibly the West Indies.11 The carefully crafted collection in a jour- nal embossed Poems on the spine is unambiguously a final draft with no visible work- in- progress or editorial marks. Several poems in the col- lection point to their own circulation, including a reference to a friend to whom Andrews lent the entire volume, an expected practice of manuscript poets (118). Another poem, To the Same, one of many addressed to her best friend (and Rev. John Lathrops future wife), Miss Checkley, reflects a playful poetic exchange between the two women. The poem is an answer to Miss Checkleys lines You know the Muses never send / Their aid to your dull stupid friend! (60). Andrews responds that only pride keeps Miss Checkley from displaying her talents at Rhyme (61). These jests indicate that the poems circulated quickly among friends. The lines also provide important clues about the presence of the poem Slavery among Andrewss local coterie. The friendly banter confirms that within days of composing Slavery Andrews had exchanged poems and encouraged at least one person to respond in verse and to display her tal- ents. Such activity suggests that Andrews could have also shared the poem Slavery near the date of its composition, and perhaps even read it to others gathered in her (or anothers) home while they anticipated the ar- rival of Wheatleys manuscript in London.12 This would be necessary if Andrews was hoping to gain something by defining Wheatleys moment because she would need to make the poem public to do so. This evidently would have pleased the Wheatleys, who were vigorously promoting the poet, as it seems unlikely that Andrews would have included the poem in 672 } early aMerICan lIteratUre: VolUMe 51 , nUMber 3 her circulating volume if it was not supported, or at the very minimum not condemned, by Susanna Wheatley. Though the poem on Wheatley appears singular in the volume for its political content, it should be understood as traveling in the same circuit as the rest of the collection. Though there is not yet definitive evidence regarding the specific recep- tion of Andrewss poem, if it reached her brother in Philadelphia like some of her other poetry, it may well have had a discernible impact on anti- slavery debates there. Just two months after Andrews penned Slavery, the Philadelphian physician Benjamin Rush enlisted the example of Wheatley, this Negro Girl . . . whose singular genius and accomplishments are such as not only do honor to her sex, but to human nature, in An Address to the Inhabitants of the British Settlements in America, upon Slave- Keeping (2n). At this point, Rush had only heard of Wheatley secondhand, possibly through his wife, Julia Stockton Rush, who had at least one of Wheatleys poems (Carretta, Biography 89). If Andrewss brother William circulated his sisters poem along with Wheatleys verse in Philadelphia, which was more likely at this time given the recent guilt trip that John laid on William for not taking notice of Ruths verse, Rush may have taken his cue from Andrews to enlist Wheatley as a proof against slavery.13 The poem Slavery is quite provocative not only for its early but also its extended use of Wheatley as an argument against slavery in a growing conversation surrounding its legality in the British Empire. It displays a grander tone than many of Andrewss other poems, which gives a sense of an expanded circuit of address that speaks not only to her coterie but to the colonies and London. It also alludes to, and then categorically dismisses, Wheatleys signed attestation. While the elite men of Boston were asked to attest to the mere fact of black authorship, Andrews claims the authority to speak to the poetrys quality and the poets personhoodand this through pointing out that the merit of Phillis and her poems can be rendered objectively certain by the poems themselves. While a signed document, or even a presumptuous poet, may attest to them, the verse speak[s] a soul. In a common rhetorical move, Andrews defers to a far sublimer poet then herself to adequately praise Wheatley; instead, she dare[s] to out- line the political ramifications of Wheatleys aesthetic pursuits. The final section reads as if the poet were a student of Wheatleys poem On Imagi- nation, from which she gleaned that no Earthly power can enslave the brain. The poet acknowledges that Wheatleys sorrows are extensive and Two New Manuscript Poems { 673 enlarged, but explains that the enslaved poet keeps them at bay through an inborn fortitude. One of the four cardinal virtues, this type of forti- tude is a God- given, reasoned, and resolute commitment to the truth that never wavers or gives in to fear. Andrews portrays Wheatley as one em- bodying this virtue in this indefatigable quest for equality, a person who cannot not [feel] superior to chains in her ingenious breast. With these arguments, Andrews intervenes in a pressing public dis- course surrounding the meaning and consequence of African genius. Interestingly, Andrewss entire poem anticipates the proslavery arguments that Samuel Estwick, a man firmly rooted in the West Indies through mar- riage and land, makes in specific relation to the free Jamaican poet and scholar Francis Williams: Although a Negroe is found, in Jamaica or elsewhere, ever so sensible and acute; yet if he is incapable of moral sensations, or perceives them only as beasts do simple ideas, without the power of combination, in order to use (which I verily believe to be the case); it is a mark that dis- tinguishes him from the man who feels and is capable of these moral sensations, who knows their application and the purposes of them, as sufficiently, as he himself is distinguished from the highest species of brutes. (79n) Williams had been at the heart of arguments surrounding black inferiority for some time. He was a high- profile and divisive figure in Jamaica at the same time that Andrewss father and several of her brothers were actively trading with, or lived in, the West Indies and London. In the two years before Andrews crafted her poem, the meaning of Williamss genius had again preoccupied both proslavery and antislavery advocates.14 It would seem almost natural, then, for Andrews to allude to him as she elevated Wheatleys genius, feeling, and virtue. Andrewss final poetic gesture moves outward from Wheatley to all our untutord blacks who may yet display / Virtues which Heaven ap- proves, and will survey. These last lines of the poem echo and answer the prayer that concludes Williamss only surviving poem, An Ode: Then this my prayrMay earth and heaven survey / A people blest, beneath your sway! (224). While this may well be mere coincidenceafter all the English translation of the poem, which was composed in Latin in 1759, would not appear in print until Edward Long included it in his History 674 } early aMerICan lIteratUre: VolUMe 51 , nUMber 3 of Jamaica, published in London in 1774the similarity gives pause. Did the Barrell family have access to the poem in manuscript? In English? Was Andrewss poem not only an explicit attempt to offer up the newest repre- sentative of black genius as proof of the cruel injustice of slavery but also a specific response to, and extension of, Williamss verse? Admittedly, these are tenuous connections, but they are important questions to consider in the continuing research on manuscript verse circulation. When Williams and Wheatley appeared in these early arguments they were often brief mentions in a footnote. Rush even deleted his footnote on Wheatley in the second edition of his Address. In contrast, Andrews placed Wheatley at the very core of her poem. The discovery of a contem- poraneous, white female manuscript poet who engaged Wheatley in verse and boldly attempted to define the political meaning of her comprehen- sive poems expands the possibilities for understanding Wheatleys rela- tionships with local poets. Further research and analysis of Ruth Barrell Andrewss poetry and the contexts though which it traveled promise to help answer salient questions about these poetic networks and the various purposes they served in the Wheatleyan moment. Slavery Sure some great cause as yet remains conceald Yet undiscoverd, and yet unreveald Why tyrant man should thus reflect disgrace, Why cast an odium oer the human race. Why half Mankind the other half enslave, Why base injustice should Dominion have. The Africans, our equals best can say Too long accustomd to a lawless sway. How great the conflict in a noble breast To breathe in bondage to exist oppressd Barterd as menials from their native shore Which they reluctant leave, & see no more. Wafted15 forever from a genial soil Unhappy prisoners, enslaved to toil Despised as miscreants, branded with disgrace Two New Manuscript Poems { 675 And disalowd the level of their race. Weve recent proof that dignity of mind Is not to color or to rank confind A youthful female of this sable tribe Enrichd with wisdom unalayd by pride Her elegance of thought must clearly prove, The rays of knowledge, brighten from above. Where can we boast a genious of our own Whose rare abilities have hers outshone? Her natral graces yet unrivald beam, And teach the value of a soul* within: The merit Phillis may with justice claim Her comprehensive poems ascertain: They speak a soul beneficently great A soul whose magnitude surmounts her fate My pen shall not presume to paint her praise, I leave the Theme to far sublimer lays. I only dare, tho humbly to maintain No Earthly power can enslave the brain. Nor all the scorn which insolence bestows, Can rob the mind where innate greatness flows That being feels superior to chains, And every tryal of this life sustains. It dignifies a freedom nought can wrest Or ever tare from the ingenious breast. This consolation only can appease Sorrows extensive and enlarged as these. Sorrows which magnanimity can swell, An inborn fortitude may oft repel And our untutord blacks may yet display Virtues which Heaven approves, and will survey. 1st December, 1772. Taken from the earliest known copy held at the Boston Public Library. The Massa- chusetts Historical Society 1791 copy by Theodore Barrell, Jr., contains slight changes in punctuation. 676 } early aMerICan lIteratUre: VolUMe 51 , nUMber 3 *An alternative, though less plausible, reading of the manuscript is And teach the value of a soil within. Andrews appears to have mistakenly written the word soil, which Theodore Barrell, Jr., retained in his copy. To Mrs. Eliot on the Death of Her Child Much do I wish a sisters mind at ease, O, that her poignant grief I could appease, Yet such the cause from whence her sorrows spring, The wish! were vain, and hope! is on the wing. For could a tender sympathy make less Your great affliction! your severe distress! Soon had your swolen bosom found relief From one who shares a part in all your grief:* I feel your loss!for sure your loss is mine, But Heaven! is justand we must not repine. To me your child was infinitely dear As now is witnessd by the falling tear: Tis for ourselves alone, we breathe these sighs! Or find the drops just starting from our eies! Think my dear sister that this stroke severe Firmly evinces the Almightys care! His mind all innocence, no vice could stain, The pure ideas of an infants brain. Thus in a state of purity within His soul unsullied with the marks of sin Our heavnly father viewd him with delight And then withdrew him, from a parents sight. While Seraphs wafted through etherial air The happy object of your earthly care, Encircled with felicity and Love! Safely conveyd him to the realms above! Of this wer[e] sure!then can you want again Your darling Charles, to pass one hour of pain? Or wish in your imagination wild, One dear embrace from you departed child? Had he still flourishd to mature age Two New Manuscript Poems { 677 His life tis possible, on this vast stage Had not been equal to the hopes you formd From early beauties which his face adornd. Had vanity oer Virtue gaind controul And soild the snowey whiteness of his soul. You in the anguish of your heart had cried Oh! that in infancy my Charles had died! When he fair spotless, on my bosom leand And his young mind with dawning Virtue beamd. Regret not now those lost fond hours which he With sweet engaging smiles afforded thee, But Bless! your Maker, that to you was given Two lovely Babes, who form a part of Heaven!** 2nd September, 1772. Taken from the earliest known copy held at the Boston Public Library. Bold font in- dicates multiple underlines; underlining in manuscript is indicated here by italics. The Massachusetts Historical Society 1791 copy contains slight changes in punctua- tion and the addition of the initial E. to the title for Elizabeth Eliots first name. *Referring to the recent death of Ruths and Elizabeths mother. **Referring to Elizabeth and Samuel Eliots first child, Elizabeth, who was born in 1767 and died the same year. notes I would like to thank the Massachusetts Historical Society for supporting my book- in- progress on evangelical poetry through a long- term NEH grant, which enabled the discovery of Andrewss poem. The research presented in this article is part of my second book project on early American women poets. I would also like to thank Special Collections at the Boston Public Library whose anonymous archivist included a folder of genealogical material and research with the collec- tion that verified my initial assignment of Ruth Barrell Andrews as the author of the MHS copy. I would also like to thank Sandra Gustafson and the outside readers for generously shaping the final version of this essay. 1. In her essay Our Phillis, Ourselves, Brooks established the centrality of white womens manuscript culture in Wheatleys poetic rise by focusing on Wheatleys elegies. For a detailed description of the events leading up to Wheatleys publica- tion, see both Brookss article and Carrettas biography of Wheatley. While both scholars mention Ruth Barrell Andrews neither identifies her as a poet who is invested in Wheatleys work. 678 } early aMerICan lIteratUre: VolUMe 51 , nUMber 3 2. The Boston Public Library also holds several of Ruth Barrell Andrewss letters, some written in verse (Letters to Joseph Barrell). The manuscript volume of verse at the Massachusetts Historical Society has been unknown to scholars in part be- cause it was mistakenly catalogued as the commonplace book of Theodore Bar- rett, Jr. However, the book is signed Theodore Barrell, Jr., Boston, May 7, 1791. It is an incomplete copy of Ruth Barrell Andrewss manuscript volume. In addition to those at the library and the society, a large number of papers of the extended Barrell family survive in various collections, including those housed at the New- York Historical Society, New York Public Library, Butler Library at Columbia University, Maine Historical Society, and New London County Historical So- ciety. 3. While Joseph Green has begun to receive his dues through the scholarship of David Shields, Ruth Green Barrells participation in the early poetic culture of Boston requires further work. See John Barrells letterbook for evidence of his and Ruth Green Barrells active participation in Joseph Greens poetic circle. 4. For Ruth Barrell Andrewss versified correspondence with her brother Joseph Barrell see her letters at the Boston Public Library. In a letter to William Bar- rell dated January 10, 1775, held at the Massachusetts Historical Society, John Andrews copied the verse that Joseph Green sent his niece. Ruth Barrell Andrews includes her poetic response to her uncle Greens verse dated January 10, 1775, in the manuscript book held at the Boston Public Library (Poems). This poem does not appear in the incomplete copy at the Massachusetts Histori- cal Society, which stops abruptly at page 41 after the poem To Miss Checkley, dated December 4, 1772. 5. Sally Sayward Barrell Keating Wood was the daughter of Ruth Barrell Andrewss brother Nathaniel Barrell and Sarah Sayward. 6. Samuel Eliots daughter by his second wife, Catherine Atkins, gives a description of Ruth Barrell Andrews in which, despite the sexist minimization of her, she re- members her as a wit and a poet: Mrs. Andrews was peculiar in most things. Her figure was smaller, more deli- cate, than those about her; her feet and hands were small and prettily shaped; her complexion was fair and soft; her eyes were bright but small, her voice variable and low, and her enunciation so slow and measured that each word had a space to itself, so that one felt entitled to something better than com- mon. Fortunately, some quickness of wit and repartee, with a flavor of sar- casm, kept up attention and interest. This fairy- like figure was always dressed in rich silks of delicate hues, with much fine lace about the head and throat. It seems to me as if she was always seated in an arm- chair like a throne, with a footstool, and holding a fan or screen. I never recollect seeing her occupied with any womans work, or hearing of her undertaking any, beyond a little drawing with pen and ink, a little versifying, or a little reading. But a wife, and mother of four children, must have been forced sometimes to real work; Two New Manuscript Poems { 679 perhaps it was skill and refined taste that kept it out of sight. Mrs. Andrews certainly had attractive powers and qualities, for my father and mother were much attached to her, and they estimated her by different though equally gen- erous standards. Intercourse between the families was frequent; visits were often exchanged, beginning with dinner at three oclock, and ending with sup- per at nine, after a rubber of whist. There was much fun, repartee, and anima- tion, at these meetings, among the elders, I am told (for this was before my time); but to the younger portion of the family they were more discipline than pleasure. (Ticknor 1819) While this familial biography of Samuel Eliot contains several poems, includ- ing verse penned by Samuel Eliot and Catherine Atkins, there is no mention of Ruth Barrell Andrewss elegy on Charles Eliot, nor the inclusion of any of her or Wheatleys verse. The book does include a letter written by Samuel Eliot in which he refers to sharing Wheatleys elegy on Charles Eliot. 7. Carretta suggests that it was Mather Byles who gave Wheatleys earliest known poem to Jeremy Belknap (Phillis Wheatley 48). 8. Interestingly, while Dunlap praises Whitefield and downplays Wheatley, Andrews downplays Whitefield and praises Wheatley. Dunlaps 1771 book of poems in celebration of the late Whitefield credits Wheatley in a back- handed compliment: Shall his due praises be so loudly sung By a young Afric damsels virgin tongue? And I be silent! and no mention make Of his blest name, who did so often speak. (4) Andrews includes one poem in her manuscript that mentions Whitefield en- titled A Very Silly Note, which was written months before his death. In it she parodies a note sent by her soon- to- be husband, John Andrews, that strongly en- courages her not to go hear Whitefield preach while she is ill. 9. Andrewss investment in abolition, however, is murky at best. The fervency of Andrewss poem does not seem entirely extraordinary given that her sisters family was well known in Boston for its antislavery sentiments. However, many in her immediate and extended family owned and traded slaves, including her father and her nephew, Theodore Barrell, Jr., with whom she kept a close cor- respondence and shared her volume of poetry. Unless more evidence comes to light, it seems Andrewss initial passion dissipated, as did that of many of Wheatleys white British North American supporters. 10. Wheatley wrote her poem On Recollection after a woman suggested that she write it, which points to other moments in which Wheatley engaged the local poetic coterie in standard verse challenges. There is some additional evidence in Andrewss manuscript volume that Andrews and Wheatley might have prodded and responded to each other. Andrews includes a prose piece that meditates on fancy, which might be a counterpart to Wheatleys On Imagination. Andrews 680 } early aMerICan lIteratUre: VolUMe 51 , nUMber 3 also concludes her volume with the poem Retrospection more than a decade after Wheatleys On Recollection, which may acknowledge Wheatleys earlier poem. 11. As already mentioned, there is direct evidence that Ruth Barrell Andrewss poems were sent to her brother in Philadelphia. There is indirect evidence that her poems may have traveled to the West Indies and New York through her nephew Theodore Barrell, Jr. (named for her brother Theodore Barrell though son of her brother Walter Barrell, who was a slave trader along with her own father, John Barrell). Theodore, Jr., grew up in the West Indies, where his Loyal- ist father fled, but returned to the colonies for a time, during which he copied the first half of Andrewss manuscript volume in May 1791, and then left to live in Demerara in July 1791. He kept in close contact with Andrews and may have taken her poetry with him. He eventually returned to the United States and died in New York. He was a slave owner who firmly believed in the inequality of Afri- cans and railed against both abolitionists and the evils of West Indian slavery in his old age. His copy of Andrewss poetry book raises many questions about its circulation that require further research. Additionally, Andrews corresponded with many others in her family who were Loyalists and fled Boston, including some to Halifax and London with the Winslow family, who may have taken her poetry. 12. See Brooks on Wheatleys domestic poetic performances. On the domestic per- formance culture of Boston, see Kelley. 13. John Andrews sent several of Wheatleys, Ruth Barrell Andrewss, and his own poems to William Barrell in Philadelphia. While the extant letters between John Andrews and William Barrell do not mention the transmission of Slavery, they do refer to missing letters by Ruth. 14. See Carrettas essay Who Was Francis Williams? from which this material is drawn and which covers the poets disruptive presence in the West Indies in greater detail. 15. It is worth noting that Andrews uses the term wafted to refer to Wheatleys experience of the Middle Passage as well as to the experience of the soul trans- ported by angels to heaven in her elegy on Charles Eliot. The term deserves ex- tended analysis for its ambiguity: it can refer to being carried in flight by wind, angels, or magic, or to convoy a ship. This second meaning was obsolete by the seventeenth century except for poets who used it to refer to being carried across water, including the popular eighteenth- century poet Edward Young in Night Thoughts. The term, which may either be laced with a striking material reference to the Middle Passage or wash over the event with the words gentle and ethereal sense, evokes Wheatleys use of the innocuous term brought in one poem, and the more sinister term snatchd in another, to refer to own experience of the slave trade. Wheatley also uses the word wafted in two of her poems: To a Gentleman and Lady on the Death of the Ladys Brother and Sister, and a Child of the Name Avis, Aged One Year (Your sighs are wafted to the skies in vain) Two New Manuscript Poems { 681 and To a Clergyman on the Death of His Lady (Thy sighs no more be wafted by the wind), both of which refer to the vain actions and sorrows of men in the face of Providence. works CIted Andrews, John. Letter to William Barrell. 29 May 1772. MS. Andrews- Eliot Manuscripts, 1772. Massachusetts Hist. Soc., Boston. . Letter to William Barrell. 22 Sept. 1772. MS. Andrews- Eliot Manuscripts, 1772. Massachusetts Hist. Soc., Boston. . Letter to William Barrell. 10 Jan. 1775. MS. Andrews- Eliot Manuscripts, 1774. Massachusetts Hist. Soc., Boston. Andrews, Ruth Barrell. Letters to Joseph Barrell. 1765. MS. Letters and Manuscript, 176590. Boston Public Lib., Boston. . Letter to Theodore Barrell, Jr. 27 March 1795. MS. Barrell Family Papers. Series I Correspondence, 17511841. Butler Lib., Columbia U, New York. . Poems, Interspersed with Prose. MS. Letters and Manuscript, 1770. Boston Public Lib., Boston. Barrell, John. Letterbook. 1730s1750s. MS. New- York Hist. Soc., New York. Brooks, Joanna. Our Phillis, Ourselves. American Literature 82.1 (2010): 128. Carretta, Vincent. Phillis Wheatley: A Biography of a Genius in Bondage. Athens: U of Georgia P, 2011. . Who Was Francis Williams? Early American Literature 38.2 (2003): 21337. Dunlap, Jane. Poems, upon Several Sermons, Preached by the Revd, and Renowned, George Whitefield, While in Boston. Boston, 1771. Americas Historical Imprints. Web. 22 May 2016. Estwick, Samuel. Considerations on the Negroe Cause Commonly So Called, Addressed to the Right Honourable Lord Mansfield. Lord Chief of the Court of Kings Bench, &c. 2nd ed. London, 1773. ECCO. Web. 22 May 2016. Kelley, Mary. Learning to Stand and Speak: Women, Education, and Public Life in Americas Republic. Chapel Hill: U of North Carolina P, 2006. Rush, Benjamin. An Address to the Inhabitants of the British Settlements in America, upon Slave- Keeping. Philadelphia, 1773. Early American Imprints. Web. 22 May 2016. Ticknor, Anna. Samuel Eliot. Boston, 1869. HathiTrust. Web 22 May 2016. Waldstreicher, David. The Wheatleyan Moment. Early American Studies 9.3 (2011): 52251. Williams, Francis. An Ode. Phillis Wheatley: Complete Writings. Ed. Vincent Carretta. New York: Penguin, 2001. Notes on Contributors { 755 peter p. reed, associate professor of English at the University of Mississippi, is the author of Rogue Performances: Staging the Underclasses in Early American Theatre Culture (Palgrave, 2009) and essays on race and performance in the Caribbean and Atlantic world. wendy raphael roberts is the recent recipient of two long- term National En- dowment for the Humanities fellowships, one at the American Antiquarian So- ciety and the other at the Massachusetts Historical Society, for her monograph in progress on early evangelical verse. Her essay Evangelical Print Culture is forth- coming in the first volume of The Blackwell Companion to American Literature. karen rosenthall is a doctoral candidate in the Department of English at Rice University. She has presented her research at MLA, C19, the Society for Early Americanists, and American Literature Association conferences. ana schwartz is a doctoral candidate in the English Department at the Univer- sity of Pennsylvania, reassessing affects utility and perseverance as a biopolitical discipline of American settlement since early modernity. Her dissertation argues that colonial Puritanism has not passed. sabrina starnaman is a clinical assistant professor of literary studies at the Uni- versity of Texas at Dallas. Her research focuses on Progressive Era (18801930) American texts about women, urbanism, and disability. Currently she is com- pleting a manuscript titled Deforming the Neighbors: Cross- Class Urban Re- lations in Progressive Era Literature and is developing a multimedia project in- spired by Rebecca Harding Daviss Life in the Iron Mills with digital artist and media scholar Xtine Burrough. She teaches courses on womens literature, ethnic American Literature, literature and science, and nineteenth- century American Literature. She has an MA from Columbia University and a PhD in literature from the University of California, San Diego. karen stolley is professor in the Department of Spanish and Portuguese at Emory University. Her scholarship focuses on colonial and eighteenth- century Latin American literary and cultural studies and the transatlantic Hispanic eigh- teenth century. Recent publications include Domesticating Empire: Enlighten- ment in Spanish America (Vanderbilt UP, 2013); Catastrophe and Colony: Look- ing South (Common- place.org. 1 Dec. 2014); and an issue of the Colonial Latin America Review on Latin American Enlightenments, coedited with Mariselle Melndez (2015). Her essay Writing Back to Empire: Juan Pablo Viscardo y Guz- mns Letter to the Spanish Americans appeared in Liberty/galit/Independen- cia: Print Culture, Enlightenment, and Revolution in the Americas, 17761826 (Oak Knoll, 2007). karen weyler is a professor of English at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro. She is the author of Intricate Relations: Sexual and Economic Desire in American Fiction, 17891814 (U of Iowa P, 2004) and Empowering Words: Out- siders and Authorship in Early America, 17601815 (U of Georgia P, 2013). With Robert Battistini and Michael Cody, she is editing The Literary Magazine and Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.