248 } EARLY AMERICAN LITERATURE: VOLUME 50, NUMBER 1 scholarship, however, will continue to struggle with clarifying the distinc- tion between exemplary and representative biography. There is something decidedly neo- Whiggish about Biography and the Black Atlantic. Like those historians of the 1960s and 1970s who empha- sized the importance of human motives and ideas in the face of progres- sives economic determinism, the volume resists quantitative abstraction and opts instead for the moral value of human stories. Each chapter, more- over, is grounded in the figure of the liberal subject, the resilient and re- sourceful individual who nevertheless has an abiding social consciousness. The rhetoric of liberal individualism unsurprisingly permeates a volume dedicated to these exceptional figures who escaped slavery and claimed freedom for themselves. These subjects exemplify the virtues of selfhood, dignity, prosperity, freedom, justice, and community (11). They drama- tize the pathos of alienation and the human struggle to overcome it (15). When the editors ask, What is the moral of these stories? then, I cannot help but believe that the answer resembles that which one finds, for ex- ample, in the published narrative of Venture Smith or, better (or worse) yet, Benjamin Franklins autobiography (14). PhILIP GOULd Brown University Letters from an American Farmer and Other Essays J. hECTOR ST. JOhN dE CRVECOEUR, edited and with an introduction by dENNIS d. MOORE Cambridge: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2013 416 pp. In J. Hector St. John de Crvecoeurs Letters from an Ameri- can Farmer (1782), James the Farmer extols the simplicity and virtues of agrarian life, while also casting a critical eye on what he deems callous be- haviors, especially those associated with slavery in the southern colonies and lawlessness on the frontier. Although initially unsure of his ability to comply with Mr. F. B.s request for these letters, James is encouraged by the Englishmans assertion that writing letters is nothing more than talking on paper (5). And so, James takes up his pen and records his observations from Pennsylvania and Nantucket to Charles Town and the western fron- Book Reviews { 249 tier. From the optimism inspired by industriousness to the anguish fueled by war, Crvecoeurs Letters and essays invite examination of an American identity as it is imagined and tested during this tumultuous transition from colony to Republic. A new, scholarly edition of these writings, Letters from an American Farmer and Other Essays, edited and with an introduction by Dennis D. Moore, aids this examination in important ways with extensive context that provides valuable resources for reading, studying, and teach- ing Crvecoeurs writings and early American literature. The edition includes the twelve letters along with thirteen essays that together present a dramatic narrative about early America. This drama is particularly evident in eight of the essays that as Moore explains describe the turmoil that was, at ground level, the Revolution (xx). They are A Happy Family Disunited by the Spirit of Civil War, The Commissioners, Ingratitude Rewarded, Susquehannah, The Grotto, The Frontier Woman, History of Mrs. B., and The Man of Sorrow. With families torn apart, mysterious disappearance of friends into a subterranean cav- ern, clandestine interrogations, embattled settlements, stalwart women and despairing men, these portraits counter the bucolic harmony found in many of the letters. In A Happy Family, the narrator nostalgically marks this contrast: It was then the age of peace and innocence. In Ingrati- tude Rewarded, he regretfully observes the current state of affairs:  Tis human nature unchecked, nonrestrained in its most dangerous career of wealth and power (186, 233). The other five essays offer equally compelling portrayals of travel, colonialism, slavery, military hospitals, and industri- ousness. For this edition, Moore has worked closely with the Crvecoeur manu- scripts at the Library of Congress and archival material from Yale Univer- sitys Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library to make corrections to earlier editions, including restoring original titles and providing complete versions of both the letters and the essays. The introduction, Moving be- yond The Farmer of Feelings, provides extensive background and sur- veys a variety of critical approaches to these writings. Among many top- ics, Moore discusses shifts in tone and perspective, from the ebulliently utopian Letter III to Letter IX with its grisly, up- close representation of slavery (x). In doing so, Moore notes how reading Letters in and out of sequence may affect perspective: When readers encounter Letter III out of context, its many resonances of seventeenth- and eighteenth- century pro- 250 } EARLY AMERICAN LITERATURE: VOLUME 50, NUMBER 1 motional writings about the so- called New World make it sound too good to be true (x). In Letter III, What Is an American? Farmer James imag- ines the feelings and thoughts of an enlightened Englishman when he first lands on this continent: Here he beholds fair cities, substantial vil- lages, extensive fields, an immense country filled with decent houses, good roads, orchards, meadows, and bridges where, a hundred years ago, all was wild, woody and uncultivated! (28). All of this grandeur leads James to announce: we are the most perfect society now existing in the world (29). James also observes transformations of a different kind: Here individuals of all nations are melted into a new race of men, whose labours and pos- terity will one day cause great changes in the world (31); [m]en are like plants; the goodness and flavour of the fruit proceeds from the peculiar soil and exposition in which they grow (32). Moore notes that these two passages, in particular, from Letter III are crucial to the pattern that schol- ars have recognized as American exceptionalism, the notion that there is something uniqueand, supposedly, uniquely privilegedabout being from America (xix). Subsequent letters present a dramatic contrast, as in Letter XII, Distresses of a Frontier Man where James imagines fleeing from the turmoil of war, freeing his slaves, and finding refuge for his family in an Indian village, concluding with an appeal to O Supreme Being! to Restore peace and concord to our poor, afflicted country; assuage the fierce storm which has so long ravaged it! (173). Thus, what was once the most perfect society has become a poor, afflicted country. These con- trasts again address the issue of sequence, as Moore explains: For a reader who has been proceeding through these selections in numerical order, then, Farmer Jamess shift from navet to disillusionment makes sense (x). In another area of investigation, Moore addresses varying degree of de- tails in Letters that suggest different levels of direct observation. Letters IV VIII about Nantucket and Marthas Vineyard, for instance, include very specific details about the history, geography, and people, while Letter IX, Description of Charles- Town; Thoughts on Slavery; on Physical Evil; a Melancholy Scene has fewer specific details, which raises questions about the narrators firsthand observations. Moore elaborates: There are no place names, for example, no references even to the salt air or to the rivers that converge in Charlestons deep and beautiful harbor (xi). The question remains an open one, for Crvecoeur has had few biographers, and none has uncovered conclusive evidence to show that he did or did not set foot Book Reviews { 251 in the Carolinas (x xi). Additionally, Moore marks distinctions between author and narrator, noting that Farmer James, this fictional persona . . . supposedly lives on a farm near Carlisle, in Pennsylvania, rather than in Orange County, New York, where this ambitious young French- born au- thor had established a life as, literally, an American farmer (xi). A bio- graphical overview follows in which Moore writes that Michel- Guillaume Jean de Crvecoeur (17351813) was born in Normandy, went to Salis- bury, England, as a young man, and then sailed to New France, where he served as a cartographer and surveyor for the French militia there during the French and Indian War. In 1759, he moved to the colony of New York, married the daughter of a prosperous local family, and became an Ameri- can farmer, using the name by which he was naturalized in 1765, St. John (xi). After the war, he served as French consul for New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut. Moore then situates Crvecoeur within his transatlantic milieu and underscores his Enlightenment connections, where prior to his diplomatic position, Crvecoeur enjoyed notoriety as a fixture in one of Pariss fashionable literary salons, that of Jean- Jacques Rousseaus former lover, the Countess DHoudetot (xi xii). Regarding various models for the Letters, Moore discusses John Dickin- sons Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania (1768), Voltaires Letters Con- cerning the English Nation (1733), and Francis Bacons New Atlantis (1627). The last two references connect Letters to satire, as Moore explains, which leads to this question: in establishing Farmer Jamess navet so painstak- ingly in the opening three selections of Letters, might Crvecoeur be sati- rizing a certain level of credulity on the part of some English colonists? (xiii). Crvecoeurs Enlightenment and scientific interests are evident in Letter X, On Snakes; and on the Humming- Bird and Letter XI, From Mr. Iw- n Al- z, a Russian Gentleman; Describing the Visit He Paid at My Request to Mr. John Bertram, the Celebrated Pennsylvanian Botanist, which includes an interesting interview with John Bartram (16991777). Moore continues with a fascinating discussion of the French and English versions of Letters, when Crvecoeur rewrites Letters, converting it into the 1784 two- volume Lettres dun cultivateur amricain and the 1787 three- volume Lettres (xiv). In A Man of Feeling, Moore discusses how recent scholarship has helped to place [Crvecoeurs] writings within the larger eighteenth- century context of sensibility, with its emphasis on feelings (xvi). To Begin the World Anew makes interesting connections between 252 } EARLY AMERICAN LITERATURE: VOLUME 50, NUMBER 1 Crvecoeurs writings and the impulse toward change and regeneration found in John Miltons Paradise Lost (1667) and Thomas Paines Common Sense (1776). In a State of Civil War looks at Crvecoeurs writings as a direct re- sponse to the Revolutionary War. Moore again notes sequence: If a reader chooses to begin with Letter XII, the near- apocalyptic Distresses of a Fron- tier Man, and continue throughout much of the second half of this collec- tion, the effect would be that Crvecoeur is portraying a sense of graphic, violent tableaus. For him and his contemporaries who were experiencing the American Revolution firsthand, it was literally a civil war (xx). For example, in Letter XII, Crvecoeur portrays Farmer James as a yeoman farmer who is shocked to be witnessing the horrors of civil war. One way in which he emphasizes Farmer Jamess unease is by calling attention to how much this narrator had, in simpler times, identified as a subject of the Crown (xxi). Moore also addresses whether Crvecoeur himself believed that the thirteen colonies should break with the Crown (xxii). Crve- coeurs allegiances might perhaps be mirrored in Jamess unease. In Literary Touches, Moore discusses various influences on Crve- coeurs writings, such as Edmund Burkes A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful (1759). And in a discus- sion of Crvecoeurs narrative techniques, Moore cites the Rock of Lis- bon, dated New York, June 3, 1770, and the earliest surviving piece of the authors juvenilia, and finds that this essay stands as evidence that this young writers ambitions included producing much more than a simple, straightforward account or record of life on the frontier in very early America. There is another frontier at play here, that between the realms of rationalism and of sensibility, and an expression that can help put that frontier in perspective, pre- Romantic (xxiv xxv). These connections, in turn, demonstrate how, as Moore notes, Crvecoeur relished his role as a man of letters (xxvii). The introduction thus offers a rich foundation on which to explore the imaginative, emerging perceptions of American identity through Crvecoeurs diverse writings. Overall, Moores edition of Letters from an American Farmer and Other Essays offers readers a meticu- lously researched, comprehensive, accessible collection that will signifi- cantly contribute to Crvecoeur scholarship and early American studies. SUSAN C. IMBARRATO Minnesota State University Moorhead Notes on Contributors { 297 ing scholarly work by a member of the MLA and the Melville Herskovits Award awarded by the African Studies Association for the most important scholarly work in African studies. The book won the fourteenth annual Susanne M. Glass- cock Humanities Book Prize for Interdisciplinary Scholarship sponsored by Mel- bern Glasscock Center for Humanities Research, Texas A&M University, and was a Choice Outstanding Academic Book for 2012. philip gould is professor and chair of the English Department at Brown Univer- sity. He is a longtime contributor to and fan of Early American Literature. He re- cently published a book on the literature of the Loyalists during the American Revolution. susan imbarrato, professor of English at Minnesota State University, Moorhead, recently contributed an essay on Life Writings for Transatlantic Literary Studies, 16801820, edited by Eve Tavor Bannet and Susan Manning (2012). daVid jaffee teaches American material culture at the Bard Graduate Center: Decorative Arts, Design History, Material Culture, where he is also the head of new media research. His most recent book is A New Nation of Goods: Material Culture in Early America (U of Pennsylvania P, 2010) and he has also written many articles on art and artisans in early America. His current research is on the visual experience and spectacle of New York City in the nineteenth century, with a focus on the lithographs, stereoviews, popular sculpture, and parlor furniture produced by five key urban manufacturers. chris nelson is associate professor and director of graduate studies at the Univer- sity of North Dakota. His work has most recently appeared in Cultural Critique, Studies in American Indian Literatures, and Critique. christopher n. phillips is associate professor of English at Lafayette College. He is the author of Epic in American Culture: Settlement to Reconstruction (Johns Hopkins UP, 2012) and is at work on a study of the transatlantic uses of hymn- books before the 1850s. He is also leading a project to construct a database of the borrowing records of the Easton (Pennsylvania) Library Company, 181162. constance post, chair of arts and humanities for the Interdisciplinary Graduate Studies Program at Iowa State University, is the author of Signs of the Times in Cotton Mathers Paterna: A Study of Puritan Autobiography (AMS, 2000) and the editor of Hannah Mather Crockers Observations on the Real Rights of Women and Selected Writings (U of Nebraska P, 2011). A cochair of the Hannah Mather Crocker Society, she also serves as a senior editor for the Journal of Transatlantic Studies. jack rakoVe is the William Robertson Coe Professor of History and American Studies at Stanford University. His most recent book is Revolutionaries: A New History of the Invention of America (Houghton, 2010). dietmar schloss teaches American literature and culture at the University of Hei- delberg. He is the author of Die tugendhafte Republik: Politische Ideologie und Literatur in der amerikanischen Grnderzeit (Universittsverlag Winter, 2003), Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.