Prion-like transmission of protein aggregates in neurodegenerative diseases The deposition of aggregated proteins and ubiquitin into intracellular inclusion bodies is a common neuropathological denominator for most neurodegenerative disorders, includ ing Parkinsons, Alzheimers and Huntingtons diseases, as well as transmissible prion encephalopathies. Each disorder is character ized by the misfolding of a specific protein or proteins: synuclein in Parkinsons disease, amyloid and tau in Alzheimers disease, huntingtin in Huntingtons disease and prion protein (PrP) in transmissible prion encephalo pathies. This suggests that impaired protein homeostasis is a shared pathogenic feature of these otherwise clinically and etiologically diverse diseases. Protein misfolding can result from native proteins changing their conformations or newly synthesized polypeptides failing to fold properly (FIG. 1). Incompletely or in correctly folded proteins expose hydrophobic amino acid side chains on their surfaces that are normally buried in the interior of the native state. Thus, they become prone to self association into aggregates that can function as nuclei that recruit additional monomers (FIG. 1; BOX 1). Such protein aggregates can become infectious and are called prions1,2 if the intermolecular inter actions between the constitutive molecules are so strong that aggregation is effectively irreversible, if they resist the cell clearance machinery (BOX 2) and if they propagate from one cell to another (FIG. 2), in which they recruit nonnative polypeptide monomers. Mammalian PrP is a plasma membrane protein1, whereas synuclein, huntingtin and tau are normally cytosolic. Thus, the propagation and trans mission of synuclein, huntingtin and tau aggregates probably differ from PrP. The generic molecular basis of prion particle formation and transmission is illustrated in BOX 1. Protein infectivity depends on several factors: irreversibility of nonnative protein assemblies, the efficiency by which precursor polypeptides are recruited into aggregates, the resistance of aggregates to the cellular clear ance machinery and the efficiency with which aggregates can transfer to neighbouring cells. In this Opinion article we highlight how the neuropathologies of Parkinsons, Alzheimers and Huntingtons diseases develop over time and space, and describe recent findings supporting the idea that patho genic proteins can transfer between cells. We propose that intercellular protein transfer contributes to the progression of neuro degenerative diseases and, therefore, can constitute a target for future diseasemodifying therapies. Patterns of neuropathology spread In neurodegenerative diseases, such as Parkinsons, Alzheimers and Huntingtons diseases, pathological changes typically develop in the nervous system following spe cific anatomical patterns that are character istic for each disorder (FIG. 3). These patterns indicate that the pathology is not only simply propagated between neighbouring cell bodies, but that it also spreads along axonal pathways either away from (anterogradely) or towards (retrogradely) the cell body (FIG. 3a). Parkinsons disease. The neuropathological hallmarks of the movement disorder Parkinsons disease are Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites, which are protein aggregates in the cell body and neuronal processes, respectively. The most abundant protein in the aggregates is synuclein. This 140 amino acid pre synaptic protein is natively unfolded (that is, it lacks a welldefined stable tertiary structure when isolated), interacts with multiple pro teins as well as lipids and membranes, and has been suggested to play a part in vesicular transport3. Although most Parkinsons disease cases are idiopathic (of an unknown cause), mutations in the synuclein gene underlie rare, inherited forms. Braak and coworkers hypothesized that brainstem and anterior olfactory structures are afflicted by synuclein aggregates very early in Parkinsons disease4. Indeed, these changes are suggested to occur several years before involvement of the substantia nigra  the midbrain region, the degeneration of which is associated with motor dysfunc tion in Parkinsons disease4,5. Synuclein aggregates are suggested to progress in a topographically predictable manner as the pathology spreads through anatomical con nections throughout the brainstem, limbic and autonomic systems and neocortex4,5 (FIG. 3b). Braak and coworkers propose that this spread primarily follows pathways consisting of long unmyelinated axons and that it starts in the olfactory system and gut6. Olfactory dysfunction is now considered an early sign of Parkinsons disease and in advanced disease people often exhibit dementia, depression and autonomic nerv ous system dysfunction, possibly owing to the spreading of synuclein aggregates6. o P i n i o n Prion-like transmission of protein aggregates in neurodegenerative diseases Patrik Brundin, Ronald Melki and Ron Kopito Abstract | Neurodegenerative diseases are commonly associated with the accumulation of intracellular or extracellular protein aggregates. Recent studies suggest that these aggregates are capable of crossing cellular membranes and can directly contribute to the propagation of neurodegenerative disease pathogenesis. We propose that, once initiated, neuropathological changes might spread in a prion-like manner and that disease progression is associated with the intercellular transfer of pathogenic proteins. The transfer of naked infectious particles between cells could therefore be a target for new disease-modifying therapies. PeRsPecTives nATurE rEvIEWS | Molecular cell Biology vOLuME 11 | APrIL 2010 | 301  20 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved10 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/dispomim.cgi?id=168600 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/dispomim.cgi?id=104300 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/dispomim.cgi?id=143100 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Unfolded polypeptide Folding intermediate Native polypeptide Folding FoldingUnfolding Slow Slow Fast Unstable non-native oligomer Unstable non-native oligomer Stable non-native oligomer (aggregation nucleus) Non-native monomer (folding intermediate) Non-native monomer addition Stable oligomer growth Stable oligomer breakage Increased number of aggregation nuclei Although the concept of Braaks neuropatho logical stages has gained much attention7,8, it is not unanimously supported. For example, different brain regions have been suggested to vary in their susceptibility to the unknown underlying disease trigger and this could contribute to the stereotypical pattern9,10. Some investigators have also questioned the reproducibility of the pattern between patients and state that it does not always fol low the same temporal order or anatomical distribution9,10. Alzheimers disease. Alzheimers disease is characterized by the loss of neurons and synapses in the cerebral cortex and certain subcortical regions. neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid plaques are the classical neuro pathological hallmarks of Alzheimers disease11,12. neurofibrillary tangles are cytoplasmic inclusion bodies that are rich in a hyperphosphorylated form of the microtubuleassociated protein tau13. normally, tau, which is a natively unfolded protein like synuclein, is a soluble protein that interacts with tubulin to stabilize micro tubules and promote microtubule assembly in the brain. Hyperphosphorylated tau tends to aggregate to form intracellular tangles of paired helical and straight filaments. Amyloid plaques, however, are extra cellular and are primarily made up of insoluble aggregates of amyloid  a 3943 residue proteolytic cleavage product of amyloid pre cursor protein (APP), which is a transmem brane protein of unknown function14. Most cases of Alzheimers disease, like Parkinsons disease, are idiopathic, although mutations in the gene encoding APP or in the enzymes that sequentially cleave it cause inherited forms of Alzheimers disease14. In Alzheimers disease, neurofibrillary tangles progressively spread throughout the brain in an anatomically stereotypical man ner. Some of the first regions affected by tangles, possibly preceded by olfactory areas15, are the hippocampus (and closely associated structures), the basal nucleus of Meynert and the brainstem, whereas the neocortex is not involved until the disease is more advanced (FIG. 3c)16,17. Even in the hippocampus and related structures, the development of tau pathology has been suggested to follow con nections anterogradely18. By contrast, the spreading of amyloid pathology does not progress through such an anatomically strict pattern in Alzheimers disease and correlates poorly with the level of cognitive decline11,19. Huntingtons disease. Mutations in the gene encoding huntingtin underlie the autosomal dominant inheritance of Huntingtons disease, which is characterized by involun tary movements, personality changes and dementia. Huntingtin is made up of 3,144 amino acids, is expressed widely throughout the body and has numerous interacting pro tein partners. Its normal functions are not fully understood; it has been implicated in antiapoptosis, neuronal gene transcription, synaptic function and vesicle and axonal transport20. Expansion of a CAG repeat in exon 1 of the huntingtin gene above a critical threshold of 3540 CAG repeats causes Huntingtons disease. The mutation encodes an expanded polyglutamine tract which makes the protein (or a fragment of the protein) prone to aggregate and to form intraneuronal inclusion bodies21,22. Huntingtin fragments bearing fewer than 35 glutamines do not aggregate and frag ments with more than 40 aggregate readily23. The longer the polyglutamine tract, the more rapid the aggregation23 and the earlier the disease onset24, showing that huntingtin aggregation is intimately linked to disease pathogenesis. Classical descriptions of Huntingtons disease emphasize that degeneration simulta neously progresses in two defined anatomical directions in the striatum25. Striatal projec tion neurons, particularly those expressing encephalin, are among the first affected in Huntingtons disease26. Brain imaging studies reveal that the basal ganglia are shrunken even before symptoms involving involuntary movements emerge27. recent brain imaging studies, however, show that various cortical regions involved in motor, sensory and visual functions already undergo thinning in asymptomatic huntingtin gene carriers, and cortical areas that subserve more advanced brain functions are afflicted later28. Thus, cortical degeneration in Huntingtons disease follows a topographically predictable pattern. Taken together, degenerative phenomena follow distinct patterns in Huntingtons disease, even if the precise temporal and topographical maps of degeneration are still not well established (FIG. 3d). Prion-like aggregate transmission Several recent experimental findings and clinical observations have suggested that pro tein aggregates associated with Parkinsons, Alzheimers and Huntingtons diseases, might move from affected to unaffected areas of the brain, suggesting that prionlike transmission of these diseases contribute to the anatomical spread of disease pathology. Figure 1 | Basic mechanisms of protein aggregation. The folding of newly synthesized polypeptide chains into their native conformations and the unfolding of proteins from their native states proceeds through distinct intermediates. some of these intermediates are able to self-associate to form non- native oligomeric species of different sizes and structures, in which a given molecule interacts through two interfaces with two neighbouring molecules (an intermediate in which longitudinal interactions are established is shown). As the polypeptides involved in prion, Parkinsons, Alzheimers and Huntingtons diseases populate a wide variety of folding intermediates, they have a higher propensity to form such oligomeric species. The stability of these oligomers increases on establishment of sup- plementary intermolecular interactions with non-native polypeptides through additional interfaces, as a given molecule in the oligomer becomes multivalent. The rate-limiting step in non-native polypep- tide aggregation is therefore the formation of stable oligomers. such oligomers behave as nuclei and grow from their ends by recruiting non-native monomers. As the binding of a molecule to the oligomer generates an incorporation site for another subunit, the growth of the stable nuclei is unlimited. Brownian52 movement and severing and/or disaggregating factors generate increased numbers of ends and increase the likelihood of new subunits being incorporated. P e r s P e c t i v e s 302 | APrIL 2010 | vOLuME 11 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio  20 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved10 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology 12 3 4 5 6 6 7 8 Abnormal prion Native prion Unstable prion oligomer 66 Stable prion aggregate (nucleus) Nucleation Elongation Steady state Steady state El on ga tio n Fr ac tio n ag gr eg at ed Time a Prion aggregation b Prion spread from cell to cell c Cooperative aggregation of prion and prion-like proteins 3 1 2 Prion aggregate Nanotube Native prion Dendrite Axon 4 Grafted cells develop Lewy bodies. A series of autopsies of Parkinsons disease patients who had received transplants of healthy embryonic neurons over one decade earlier have provided novel insight into mecha nisms that might underlie the progression of Parkinsons disease pathology29. A sub set (25% over 5 years) of the grafted neurons displayed aggregates containing synuclein2933. These inclusion bodies were positive for all the classical markers of Lewy bodies and exhibited protein fibrils at the ultrastructural level. Studies on Parkinsons disease patients dying sooner (15 years) after transplant surgery did not reveal any protein aggregates in the grafted neurons, showing that Lewy bodie s develop slowly or with a long delay in previously healthy embryonic neurons29,30. These data suggest that the Parkinsonian brain pro motes conversion of soluble synuclein into an insoluble form, but do not reveal the nature of the agent of this conversion. recently, mouse neural stem cells tagged with green fluorescent protein (GFP) were reported to develop intra cellular synuclein immunoreactivity and occasional synucleinpositive inclusion bodies when injected into the hippo campus of transgenic mice expressing human synuclein34. These studies suggest that hostderived synuclein can enter transplanted neural cells, analogous to the finding s in grafted Parkinsons disease patients. Synuclein is internalized by cells in vitro. Additional support for the hypo thesis that synuclein can move between neurons has come from in vitro studies in which GFPlabelled neural stem cells34 or SHSY5Y cells (a dopaminergic cell line)35 were cultured together with pure synuclein. After 2448 hrs of incubation, the added synuclein, marked with a fluo rescent tag, could be seen in the cytoplasm of the cells. Synuclein could also be seen in GFPlabelled neural stem cells that were cultured together with neuronal cells over expressing human synuclein, suggesting that synuclein is transferred between cells in culture34,35. Another study reports that GFPtagged synuclein oligomers added to culture media can be internalized by pri mary cortical neurons engineered to express synuclein tagged with red fluorescent protein36,37. Moreover, the addition of extra cellular GFPsynuclein induced the form ation of inclusion bodies in the cytoplasm of the recipient cells that were labelled with both fluorophores, suggesting that the inter nalized protein can act as a seed to recruit endogenous synuclein into aggregates34,36,37. Taken together, results from human autopsies, cell cultures and transgenic mice suggest that intercellular synuclein transfer can contribute to the spreading of neuro pathology in Parkinsons disease, which could explain why the pathology progresses stereotypically in accordance with the stages described by Braak4. Specifically, nonnative forms of synuclein can migrate from cell to cell along axonal pathways, leading to progressive propagation of cellular patho logy and gradually affecting greater parts of the central nervous system. Alzheimers disease and protein seeding. Two series of experiments support the notion that protein seeding (whereby a misfolded protein acts as a seed that initiates aggregate formation by recruit ing additional unfolded or oligomeric species of the same protein) contributes to the development of Alzheimers disease neuropathology. In experiments on mice overexpressing APP, injections of amyloid extracts derived from brains of Alzheimers disease patients or aged APP transgenic mice caused the deposition of amyloid38. Box 1 | Molecular basis of prion particle formation, growth and transmission Native (sphere) prion molecules undergo conformational changes that lead to an abnormal (cube) form (see the figure; part a, step 1). This event is unfavourable because the abnormal form is either unstable (part a, step 2) or sensitive to clearance. According to the template assistance model, prions in their abnormal form interact with native prions (part a, step 3) and convert them into the abnormal form (part a, step 4). The alternative seeded polymerization model proposes that abnormal prions have the ability to interact with molecules in a similar state (part a, step 5). The oligomeric species formed are unstable because the intermolecular interactions do not outweigh the entropic cost of binding. They grow by the incorporation of abnormal prion molecules (part a, step 6) and dissociate (part a, step 7) until a stable nucleus is formed. Such a stable prion aggregate can then grow indefinitely from one or both ends and can also break into smaller fragments (part a, step 8) that act as nuclei (part a, step 6). Prion aggregates bind to native prion molecules or receptor proteins attached to the cell membrane, and are internalized by endocytosis (part b, step 1). They reach the cytoplasm, by an unknown process, where they grow by the incorporation of cytosolic prions. They can move along the axon in one direction or another (part b, step 2) and can reach neighbour cells through axondendrite connections (part b, step 3) and nanotubes (part b, step 4). Prions and polypeptides involved in Parkinsons, Alzheimers and Huntingtons diseases form aggregates that resist protein denaturation treatments (see the figure, part c). This process can be monitored experimentally. Stable oligomer formation is thermodynamically unfavourable and this is reflected by a nucleation phase. The stable oligomers elongate in an exponential manner until the soluble protein concentration reaches the critical concentration, above which assembly occurs. These events give a sigmoidal shape to the assembly kinetic (see the figure, part c; green curve). The nucleation phase is abolished (see the figure, part c; orange curve) when preformed aggregates that act as seeds are added to the protein solution. P e r s P e c t i v e s nATurE rEvIEWS | Molecular cell Biology vOLuME 11 | APrIL 2010 | 303  20 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved10 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Unfolded protein Folding intermediate Native protein Degradation Degradation Accumulation Non-native protein oligomer HSP70 Ubiquitin 26S proteasome Phagophore Autophagosome Autolysosome Nucleus Microtubule Dynein Centrosome a b c d e +  Importantly, these experiments involved the extracellular deposition of amyloid and not transmembrane uptake and seeding, making them fundamentally different from the other models we discuss. By contrast, another series of experiments examined the ability of aggregated tau to enter cells in culture39. Fluorescently tagged aggregates of a tau fragment were inter nalized by C17.2 neural cells and HEK293 cells, either when the pure aggregates were added to the culture media or when the cells were cocultured with cells expressing an aggregationprone tau fragment39. These in vitro experiments raise the possibility that tau, like synuclein, can move from one brain cell to another. Once inside, the aggregated tau could seed the aggregation of the endogenous protein39, in analogy to prion propagation (BOX 1). This is sup ported by observations that mutant human tau injected into mouse brains induces the aggregation of the endogenous wildtype mouse protein, and that pathology spreads from the injection site to neighbouring brain regions40. Uptake of huntingtin aggregates. Yang and colleagues first reported that large aggre gates composed of fluorescently tagged, synthetic polyglutamine peptides can be taken up by cultured cells41. When these peptide aggregates were appended with a nuclear localization signal, they translocated to the nucleus and became highly toxic, implying that they had become accessible to cytoplasmic nuclear import factors. More recently, it was reported that when similar polyglutamine aggregates or recombinant fragments of mutant huntingtin were added to medium, they were concentrated in juxtanuclear inclusion bodies in cultured HEK293 cells42. To directly assess whether the internalized aggregates had become exposed to the cytoplasm, as opposed to remaining in a vesicular or vacuolar compartment, an intracellular seeding experiment was conducted42. When the recipient cells were engineered to express a fluorescent version of huntingtin encod ing 25 glutamines (below the threshold for spontaneous aggregation), the addition of fluorescent huntingtin aggregates contain ing 44 glutamines to the culture medium altered the distribution of the 25glutamine reporter from a diffuse to a punctate pattern and caused it to colocalize with the externally added protein. This did not occur when the huntingtincontaining recipient cells internalized aggregates com posed of other amyloids, indicating that the changes were probably due to a seeded polymerization process and that some of the internalized material had gained access to the cytoplasm42. remarkably, when cells that had been exposed to polyglutamine aggregates were maintained in prolonged cell culture, the aggregated phenotype of the 25glutamine huntingtin reporter per sisted for over 80 generations, although the fraction of cells exhibiting this pheno type remained low, possibly owing to unequal mitotic segregation of aggregates in mammalian cells43. This indicates that polyglutamine aggregates, like prions, can replicate, presumably by a seeding nuclea tion mechanism in which aggregate huntingtin seeds are transmitted to daughter cells during cell division42. Currently, the relevance of these observations to Huntingtons disease pathogenesis is unclear. neurons grafted into Huntingtons disease patients brains exhibit poor longterm (> 10 years) survival and have been suggested to sustain damage owing to excitotoxicity or inflam mation, implicating noncellautonomous patho genetic factors in the disease44. Box 2 | Cellular defences against protein aggregation Protein folding proceeds through intermediates, which expose hydrophobic amino acid side chains on their surfaces that are normally buried in the interior of the native state, and are therefore prone to self-associate into non-native oligomers (see the figure, part a). Molecular chaperones of the heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) family interact transiently with these aggregation-prone surfaces (see the figure, part b). They either compete with self-association or favour the formation of native contacts and help maintain intermediates in a monomeric, folding-competent state. Mutations or polymorphisms can destabilize the native state or decrease the efficiency of folding. Insufficient amounts of molecular chaperones also affect folding efficiency. Incompletely folded proteins are tagged with polyubiquitin chains, which direct them to the 26S proteasome for degradation (see the figure, part c). Molecular chaperones contribute to this process by maintaining the proteins in a state that can be unfolded by the 26S proteasome. Proteins that escape degradation by the 26S proteasome can be degraded by lysosomes through macroautophagy (see the figure, part d). Autophagic degradation begins with the capture of the substrate proteins (or aggregates) into phagophores that mature into autophagosomes  a vesicular structure enclosed by two concentric lipid bilayer membranes. Autophagosomes fuse with organelles of the endosomal and lysosomal pathways to form autolysosomes that, endowed with acidic pH and lysosomal hydrolases, are able to degrade proteins without the need to unfold them. Finally, the interaction of protein aggregates with the minus end-directed microtubule motor cytoplasmic dynein results in their accumulation around the centrosome or microtubule organizing centre (see the figure, part e). This process may facilitate the capture of aggregates by macroautophagy or may serve to concentrate potentially toxic aggregation nuclei in a defined region of the cell. P e r s P e c t i v e s 304 | APrIL 2010 | vOLuME 11 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio  20 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved10 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Nucleus Protein aggregate Nucleus Cell death?Passive release (membrane rupture) Passive uptake (membrane rupture) Exocytosis Endocytosis a Release of protein aggregates b Uptake of protein aggregates c Cell-to-cell propagation Membrane receptor Phospholipid ? Nucleus Nucleus Nanotube In contrast to the Parkinsons disease trans plant studies, the grafts in Huntingtons disease patients exhibited no morpho logical evidence that huntingtin with expanded polyglutamine had transferred from host to graft within a decade. These findings do not, however, preclude a role for celltocell transmission of huntingtin aggregates in Huntingtons disease progres sion. neurotoxicity in Huntingtons disease might well be due to a combination of excitotoxic and inflammatory damage, and prionlike huntingtin transmission might have a role in the pathogenic cascade, perhaps overcoming the protective effects of the machinery described in BOX 2. How aggregates move between cells The spread of protein aggregates in the nervous system is likely to contribute to the advances of clinical symptoms and neuropathological changes in Alzheimers, Parkinsons and Huntingtons diseases. recent studies have demonstrated cellto cell or mediatocell transfer of aggregates, but have given less insight into the mecha nisms by which they are released or takenup. Below, we describe potential underlying mechanisms. Requisites for cell-to-cell transmission. In order for a prionlike mechanism to contribute to the progression of a neuro degenerative disease, four basic require ments must be fulfilled. First and foremost, the protein aggregate must be capable of elongating by the recruitment of soluble polypeptide chains and fragmenting to generate additional elongation sites and amplify aggregation (FIG. 1; BOX 1). This has now been established in vitro, in studies discussed above, for proteins species that aggregate in Parkinsons disease, tauopathy and Huntingtons disease. Second, cells infected by aggregates must continu ously synthesize the nonaggregated form. Third, the transmissible aggregate must be released from cells (FIG. 2a). Fourth, aggre gates must be able to bind and enter the recipient cell (FIG. 2b). Mechanisms of aggregate release. Cells can release aggregates either by a vesicle mediated exocytic process, perhaps resulting from incomplete autophagocytosis45, or by lysosomal exocytosis46 (FIG. 2a). Cultured neuroblastoma cells and neurons secrete synuclein monomers and aggregates by a nonclassical vesiclemediated exocytic mechanism; however, the molecular details are still unknown47. Alternatively, aggregates can be passively released from cells either on binding and local rupture of the membrane or after cell lysis, which could occur as a result of the toxicity imposed on cells by the burden of high levels of protein aggregation (FIG. 2a). For example, when cells expressing huntingtin bearing an expanded poly glutamine tract were selectively killed, the released aggregates caused nucleation of a cytoplasmic polyglutamine reporter protein inside cocultured cells42. Although both potential release mechanisms (exo cytosis and cell rupture due to death) are likely to occur in neurodegenerative disease, their relative importance to pathogenesis has not been studied. Figure 2 | Potential pathways of uptake and release of protein aggregates by cells. a | Protein aggregates formed in cells can be passively released from cells by membrane rupture or damage, perhaps accompanying cell death. Alternatively, cytoplasmic aggregates can be actively released by exocytosis, possibly following capture by macroautophagy and mis-sorting or incomplete diges- tion in the endosomal and lysosomal systems. b | Likewise, protein aggregates that bind passively to cell membrane components (phospholipids or protein receptors) can enter the cell either pas- sively by physical rupture of the plasma membrane or actively through endocytosis. Aggregates taken up by endocytosis must cross a biological membrane to reach the cytoplasm, where they can elongate by incorporation of their constituting proteins. c | Protein aggregates, either formed in cells or taken up by cells, can also actively propagate from cell to cell, possibly by cytoskeletal components such as molecular motors and nanotubes (see also BOX 1). P e r s P e c t i v e s nATurE rEvIEWS | Molecular cell Biology vOLuME 11 | APrIL 2010 | 305  20 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved10 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Exocytosis Release at death Anterograde transport Retrograde transport Axon Neuronal cell body b Parkinsons diseasea Models of spread d Huntingtons diseasec Alzheimers disease Mechanisms of aggregate uptake. In cultured cells, internalized synuclein aggregates partially colocalized with endosomal and lysosomal markers35. Expression of a dominan tnegative form of dynamin  a GTPase required for endocytic membrane fusion  inhibited this uptake. This implies that the endocytic machinery is involved in this process35 (FIG. 2b). Amyloid fibrils, including those associated with systemic amyloid disease48 and those not normally found in eukaryotes49, can be internalized by cultured cells, possibly by breaching the plasma membrane (FIG. 2b). Although these findings raise the possibility that mam malian cells might have a greater ability to internalize ordered fibrillar aggregates than previously thought, further studies are required to understand the molecular mechanisms. Even if neurons and other mammalian cells take up fibrillar aggregates by endo cytosis, in order for them to nucleate aggregation of endogenous cytoplasmic proteins, which is essential for the prionlike hypothesis, they must escape the intracellular vesicle and gain access to the cytoplasm. The aggregates investigated in the cell culture studies described above are too polar to dif fuse passively across lipid bilayers and too large to pass through transmembrane pores or transporters. nonetheless, extracellular aggregates containing polyglutamine42, tau39 and synuclein34 have now been shown to enter cells and cause seeding of endogenous proteins. Deepetch electron microscope images of polyglutamine aggregates shortly after internalization into cultured cells revealed naked aggregates on the cyto plasmic face of the plasma membrane. There was no evidence of a surrounding membra nous structure42, suggesting that aggregates can penetrate the plasma membrane in the absence of vesicular uptake. Studies in artifi cial systems on synuclein oligomers show that they can render lipid bilayer membranes permeable to fluorescent dyes, suggesting that synuclein aggregates can intercalate directly into lipid membranes50. This pro vides a potential means by which aggregates could exit from endosomes or perhaps cross the plasma membrane directly. Finally, it is possible that tunnelling nanotubes  50200 nm diameter actinrich hollow filaments seen between interconnected cells in culture51  can act as transport conduits for prionlike protein aggregates, as has been suggested for PrP51 (FIG. 2c). Conclusions and perspectives Several neurodegenerative diseases have symptomatic onset in mid or late life and often have protracted courses. This is evident in dominantly inherited familial diseases such as Huntingtons disease and rare familial forms of Alzheimers disease and Parkinsons disease, in which the central nervous system copes with the continued synthesis of mutant, aggregationprone proteins for many decades before eventu ally exhibiting neuropathology. Cellular defences, such as those described in BOX 2, probably suppress the formation of aggre gation nuclei during this latent period. In these diseases, as with the more common Figure 3 | Principles for progression of neuropathological changes. a | intracellular protein aggre- gates can be released from neurons by exocytosis or cell death. The aggregates are taken up by, for example, adjacent neuronal cell bodies and are either retained in the cell soma (local spread of path- ology) or transported anterogradely by axons. Alternatively, they are taken up by axon terminals and transported retrogradely to the cell soma. The protein aggregates can spread between brain regions by axonal transport. bd | Three drawings propose principles for how neuropathological changes in Parkinsons, Alzheimers and Huntingtons diseases spread spatiotemporally during disease progres- sion. The earlier the neuropathology develops in a given brain region, the darker the shading in the diagram. As only one view (mid-sagittal for Parkinsons and Alzheimers diseases; lateral for Huntingtons disease) of the brain is depicted for each disorder, not all relevant anatomical structures and details of the spreading patterns (indicated by arrows) are presented. b | in Parkinsons disease, -synuclein aggregates (Lewy neurites and Lewy bodies) are suggested to first appear in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagal nerve in the brainstem and anterior olfactory structures (darkest green), and then to spread stereotypically to finally occupy large parts of the brain4,5. c | in Alzheimers disease, neurofibrillary tan- gles first appear in the hippocampus (and closely associated structures), the basal nucleus of Meynert and the brainstem1518 (darkest green). They spread to other brain regions, including the neocortex, in a stereotypical manner, correlating with symptomatic progression. d | in Huntingtons disease, the puta- men and caudate nucleus, and related basal ganglia structures deep inside the brain (darkest green), have been suggested to degenerate first2527. However, recent imaging studies suggest that primary motor and sensory cortices already undergo atrophy in pre-symptomatic gene carriers28. Therefore we propose that cortical involvement precedes basal ganglia pathology. P e r s P e c t i v e s 306 | APrIL 2010 | vOLuME 11 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio  20 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved10 idiopathic diseases, the low probability of spontaneous misfolding and aggrega tion of correctly folded cellular proteins into pathogenic aggregates might explain why disease onset is typically in mid life or later. Following the lag phase, intercellular transfer of proteins might even have a role in the propagation of neuropathology in the genetic neurodegenerative disorders. Thus, once aggregated proteins have appeared in a stochastic manner they may be extruded from an initiating subpopulation of cells and spread to neighbouring neurons. Whether prionlike transmission mecha nisms actively contribute to the pathogenesis of idiopathic neurodegenerative diseases remains unclear. We cannot exclude that diseaserelated proteins transfer between individuals through the use of contaminated surgical tools or on tissue transplant, but there are no reports to support this. If prionlike transmission has a role, it seems more likely to contribute to the gradual spreading of neuropathological changes in the brains of afflicted individuals. Importantly, the possible existence of extracellular intermediates in the progression of what previously have been considered strictly cellautonomous intra cellular disorders, provides a hitherto unap preciated extracellular stage in pathogenesis. This extracellular step in the pathogenesis may represent a more readily accessible target for novel therapeutic intervention. Patrik Brundin is at the Neuronal Survival Unit, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center, Lund University, BMC A10, 221 84 Lund, Sweden. Ronald Melki is at the Laboratoire dEnzymologie et Biochimie Structurales, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 91198 GifsurYvette, France. Ron Kopito is at the Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 943055020, USA. emails: patrik.brundin@med.lu.se; melki@lebs.cnrsgif.fr; kopito@stanford.edu doi:10.1038/nrm2873 1. Prusiner, S. B. Prions. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 95, 1336313383 (1998). 2. Prusiner, S. B. Novel proteinaceous infectious particles cause scrapie. Science 216, 136144 (1982). 3. Uversky, V. N. Neuropathology, biochemistry, and biophysics of -synuclein aggregation. J. Neurochem. 103, 1737 (2007). 4. Braak, H., Ghebremedhin, E., Rub, U., Bratzke, H. & Del Tredici, K. Stages in the development of Parkinsons disease-related pathology. Cell Tissue Res. 318, 121134 (2004). 5. Braak, H. et al. Stanley Fahn Lecture 2005: The staging procedure for the inclusion body pathology associated with sporadic Parkinsons disease reconsidered. Mov. Disord. 21, 20422051 (2006). 6. Hawkes, C. H., Del Tredici, K. & Braak, H. Parkinsons disease: a dual-hit hypothesis. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 33, 599614 (2007). 7. Jang, H. et al. Highly pathogenic H5N1 influenza virus can enter the central nervous system and induce neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA106, 1406314068 (2009). 8. Jang, H., Boltz, D. A., Webster, R. G. & Smeyne, R. J. Viral parkinsonism. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1792, 714721 (2009). 9. Burke, R. E., Dauer, W. T. & Vonsattel, J. P. A critical evaluation of the Braak staging scheme for Parkinsons disease. Ann. Neurol. 64, 485491 (2008). 10. Jellinger, K. A. Formation and development of Lewy pathology: a critical update. J. Neurol. 256 270279 (2009). 11. Nelson, P. T., Braak, H. & Markesbery, W. R. Neuropathology and cognitive impairment in Alzheimer disease: a complex but coherent relationship. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 68, 114 (2009). 12. Duyckaerts, C., Delatour, B. & Potier, M. C. Classification and basic pathology of Alzheimer disease. Acta Neuropathol. 118, 536 (2009). 13. Goedert, M., Klug, A. & Crowther, R. A. Tau protein, the paired helical filament and Alzheimers disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 9, 195207 (2006). 14. Selkoe, D. J. Alzheimers disease: genes, proteins, and therapy. Physiol. Rev. 81, 741766 (2001). 15. Pearson, R. C., Esiri, M. M., Hiorns, R. W., Wilcock, G. K. & Powell, T. P. Anatomical correlates of the distribution of the pathological changes in the neocortex in Alzheimer disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 82, 45314534 (1985). 16. Braak, H. & Braak, E. Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes. Acta Neuropathol. 82, 239259 (1991). 17. Delacourte, A. et al. Tau aggregation in the hippocampal formation: an ageing or a pathological process? Exp. Gerontol. 37, 12911296 (2002). 18. Lace, G. et al. Hippocampal tau pathology is related to neuroanatomical connections: an ageing population- based study. Brain 132, 13241334 (2009). 19. Arriagada, P. V., Growdon, J. H., Hedley-Whyte, E. T. & Hyman, B. T. Neurofibrillary tangles but not senile plaques parallel duration and severity of Alzheimers disease. Neurology 42, 631639 (1992). 20. Cattaneo, E., Zuccato, C. & Tartari, M. Normal huntingtin function: an alternative approach to Huntingtons disease. Nature Rev. Neurosci. 6, 919930 (2005). 21. Davies, S. W. et al. Formation of neuronal intranuclear inclusions underlies the neurological dysfunction in mice transgenic for the HD mutation. Cell 90, 537548 (1997). 22. DiFiglia, M. et al. Aggregation of huntingtin in neuronal intranuclear inclusions and dystrophic neurites in brain. Science 277, 19901993 (1997). 23. Scherzinger, E. et al. Huntingtin-encoded polyglutamine expansions form amyloid-like protein aggregates in vitro and in vivo. Cell 90, 549558 (1997). 24. Duyao, M. et al. Trinucleotide repeat length instability and age of onset in Huntingtons disease. Nature Genet. 4, 387392 (1993). 25. Vonsattel, J. P. & DiFiglia, M. Huntington disease. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 57, 369384 (1998). 26. Deng, Y. P. et al. Differential loss of striatal projection systems in Huntingtons disease: a quantitative immunohistochemical study. J. Chem. Neuroanat. 27, 143164 (2004). 27. Kipps, C. M. et al. Progression of structural neuropathology in preclinical Huntingtons disease: a tensor based morphometry study. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatr. 76, 650655 (2005). 28. Rosas, H. D. et al. Cerebral cortex and the clinical expression of Huntingtons disease: complexity and heterogeneity. Brain 131, 10571068 (2008). 29. Brundin, P., Li, J. Y., Holton, J. L., Lindvall, O. & Revesz, T. Research in motion: the enigma of Parkinsons disease pathology spread. Nature Rev. Neursci. 9, 741745 (2008). 30. Kordower, J. H., Chu, Y., Hauser, R. A., Freeman, T. B. & Olanow, C. W. Lewy body-like pathology in long- term embryonic nigral transplants in Parkinsons disease. Nature Med. 14, 504506 (2008). 31. Kordower, J. H., Chu, Y., Hauser, R. A., Olanow, C. W. & Freeman, T. B. Transplanted dopaminergic neurons develop PD pathologic changes: a second case report. Mov. Disord. 23, 23032306 (2008). 32. Li, J. Y. et al. Lewy bodies in grafted neurons in subjects with Parkinsons disease suggest host-to-graft disease propagation. Nature Med. 14, 501503 (2008). 33. Li, J. Y. et al. Characterization of Lewy body pathology in 12- and 16-year old intrastriatal mesencephalic grafts surviving in a patient with Parkinsons disease. Mov. Disord. 2 Mar 2010 (doi:10.1002/mds.23012). 34. Desplats, P. et al. Inclusion formation and neuronal cell death through neuron-to-neuron transmission of -synuclein. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA106, 1301013015 (2009). 35. Lee, H. J. et al. Assembly-dependent endocytosis and clearance of extracellular -synuclein. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 40, 18351849 (2008). 36. Danzer, K. M., Krebs, S. K., Wolff, M., Birk, G. & Hengerer, B. Seeding induced by -synuclein oligomers provides evidence for spreading of -synuclein pathology. J. Neurochem. 111, 192203 (2009). 37. Danzer, K. M. et al. Different species of -synuclein oligomers induce calcium influx and seeding. J. Neurosci. 27, 92209232 (2007). 38. Meyer-Luehmann, M. et al. Exogenous induction of cerebral -amyloidogenesis is governed by agent and host. Science 313, 17811784 (2006). 39. Frost, B., Jacks, R. & Diamond, M. Propagation of tau misfolding from the outside to the inside of a cell. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 1284512852 (2009). 40. Clavaguera, F. et al. Transmission and spreading of tauopathy in transgenic mouse brain. Nature Cell Biol. 11, 907913 (2009). 41. Yang, W., Dunlap, J. R., Andrews, R. B. & Wetzel, R. Aggregated polyglutamine peptides delivered to nuclei are toxic to mammalian cells. Hum. Mol. Genet. 11, 29052917 (2002). 42. Ren, P. H. et al. Cytoplasmic penetration and persistent infection of mammalian cells by polyglutamine aggregates. Nature Cell Biol. 11, 219225 (2009). 43. Rujano, M. A. et al. Polarised asymmetric inheritance of accumulated protein damage in higher eukaryotes. PLoS Biol. 4, e417 (2006). 44. Cicchetti, F. et al. Neural transplants in patients with Huntingtons disease undergo disease-like neuronal degeneration. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 1248312488 (2009). 45. Vogiatzi, T., Xilouri, M., Vekrellis, K. & Stefanis, L. Wild type -synuclein is degraded by chaperone-mediated autophagy and macroautophagy in neuronal cells. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 2354223556 (2008). 46. Jaiswal, J. K., Fix, M., Takano, T., Nedergaard, M. & Simon, S. M. Resolving vesicle fusion from lysis to monitor calcium-triggered lysosomal exocytosis in astrocytes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 1415114156 (2007). 47. Lee, H. J., Patel, S. & Lee, S. J. Intravesicular localization and exocytosis of -synuclein and its aggregates. J. Neurosci. 25, 60166024 (2005). 48. Morten, I. J., Gosal, W. S., Radford, S. E. & Hewitt, E. W. Investigation into the role of macrophages in the formation and degradation of 2-microglobulin amyloid fibrils. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 2969129700 (2007). 49. Bucciantini, M. et al. Prefibrillar amyloid protein aggregates share common features of cytotoxicity. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 3137431382 (2004). 50. van Rooijen, B. D., Claessens, M. M. & Subramaniam, V. Lipid bilayer disruption by oligomeric -synuclein depends on bilayer charge and accessibility of the hydrophobic core. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1788, 12711278 (2009). 51. Gousset, K. et al. Prions hijack tunnelling nanotubes for intercellular spread. Nature Cell Biol. 11, 328336 (2009). 52. Brown, R. A brief account of microscopical observations made in the month of June, July and August, 1827, on the particles contained in the pollen of plants; and on the general existence of active molecules in organic and inorganic bodies. Phil. Mag. 4, 161173 (1828). Acknowledgements All three investigators are supported by a joint Human Frontier Science Program grant on the topic relevant to this article. In addition, P.B. holds related grants from the MJ Fox Foundation for Parkinsons Research, Swedish Brain Foundation, Swedish Parkinson Foundation, Sderberg Foundation and the Swedish Research Council. R.R.K. is supported by the Huntingtons dis- ease Society of America Coalition for the Cure, the CHDI Foundation and the National Institute of Neurological Disease and Stroke. R.M. is supported by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique. R.M. and P.B. are part of the ERA-net Neuron program MIPROTRAN. Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests. DATABASES OMiM: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim Alzheimers | Huntingtons | Parkinsons FURTHER inFoRMATion Patrik Brundins homepage: www.med.lu.se/expmed/nesu all links are active in the online Pdf P e r s P e c t i v e s nATurE rEvIEWS | Molecular cell Biology vOLuME 11 | APrIL 2010 | 307  20 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved10 mailto:patrik.brundin@med.lu.se mailto:melki@lebs.cnrs-gif.fr mailto:kopito@stanford.edu http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/dispomim.cgi?id=104300 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/dispomim.cgi?id=143100 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/dispomim.cgi?id=168600 www.med.lu.se/expmed/nesu Copyright of Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology is the property of Nature Publishing Group and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.