Unpacking a Recent Study Linking Diet Soda With Stroke Risks Medical News & Perspectives Unpacking a Recent Study Linking Diet Soda With Stroke Risks Jennifer Abbasi Around 2 decades ago, researchersasked tens of thousands of partici-pants in the Womens Health Initia- tive study how often they consumed artifi- cially sweetened beverages over the past 3 months. Recently, they looked at how the diet sodas and fruit drinks the women drank back then correlated with their risks of stroke, coronary heart disease, and death in the intervening years. The results, recently publ ished in Stroke, showed higher intakes of artifi- cially sweetened beverages were associ- ated with increased health risks. Yasmin Mossavar-Rahmani, PhD, RD, the studys lead author and an associate profes- sor of clinical epi- demiolog y and population health at the Albert Einstein Col- lege of Medicine in the Bronx, emphasized that the work doesnt prove cause and ef- fect. But despite the studys limitations, [T]his is a time to pause and look into all these associations and maybe reconsider if were having excessive amounts of these drinks, she told JAMA in a recent interview. The following is an edited version of that conversation, in which the nutrition scien- tist said she hopes the public doesnt walk away with the wrong message. JAMA: Your study isnt the first to look at as- sociations with artificially sweetened bev- erages and cardiovascular disease. What did the previous studies show? DR MOSSAVAR-RAHMANI: There was another study from the Womens Health Initiative in 2014. They looked at a com- posite of events: [incident coronary heart disease], heart failure, myocardial infarc- tion, coronary revascularization proce- dures, ischemic stroke, peripheral artery disease, and cardiovascular death. They saw [an increased] risk with high con- sumption of diet drinks. Then, in 2017, there was research involving the Framing- ham Heart Study Offspring cohort in men and women. They saw an increased risk again, specifically for stroke and Alzheimer disease. The results have been mixed in different studies. But there seems to be a certain pattern of association with cardio- vascular disease. JAMA: Whats different about your study? Medical News & Perspectives......p1554 Unpacking a Recent Study Linking Diet Soda With Stroke Risks Chemicals in Consumer Products Associated With Early Puberty Health Agencies Update...............p1557 HHS Funds Development of Vaccine Against Marburg Virus Screening Preteens in the Emergency Department for Suicide Risk Free App to Help Patients Ask Appropriate Questions Clinical Trials Update ....................p1558 Rapid Blood Pressure Reduction Safe for Ischemic Stroke Caring Text Messages for Preventing Suicides Acupuncture May Reduce Menopausal Symptoms Flexible Duty Hours, Sleep, and Patient Outcomes News From the CDC ......................p1559 Trends in Blood Infection Rates Traumatic Brain Injuries Among Youth Audio News & Analysis 1554 JAMA April 23/30, 2019 Volume 321, Number 16 (Reprinted) jama.com  2019 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ by a New York University User on 05/04/2019 https://doi.org/10.1161/STROKEAHA.118.023100 https://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-014-3098-0 https://doi.org/10.1161/STROKEAHA.116.016027 https://jamanetwork.com/learning/audio-player/10.1001/jama.2019.2133/?utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jama.2019.2123 http://www.jama.com/?utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jama.2019.2123 DR MOSSAVAR-RAHMANI: We followed 81 714 women over an average of 11.9 years. The previous study in the Womens Health Initiative followed [59 614] women for about 8 years. We also looked separately at stroke and its subtypes. JAMA: Tell us what you learned. DR MOSSAVAR-RAHMANI: We found that 5.1% of the women drank 2 or more artifi- cially sweetened beverages per day. But most were infrequent drinkers. About 64.1% of the women drank artificially sweetened beverages never or less than once a week. When we looked at this group of high vs low consumers of diet drinks, we found that women who had the higher level of consumption were 23% more likely to have a fatal or nonfatal stroke; 31% more likely to have the type of stroke from a clot in the brain or ischemic stroke; 29% more likely to develop fatal or nonfatal heart disease; and 16% more likely to die from any cause. JAMA: The stroke risks were higher for cer- tain women, correct? DR MOSSAVAR-RAHMANI: Thats right. The results I just quoted were for all women. We also looked at women without previous heart disease or diabetes. In that group, [high consumers] were 2.44 times more likely to have a common type of stroke thats caused by the blockage of the very small arteriessmall artery occlusion than women with no or low levels of con- sumption. If you looked at all women, that risk was 1.81 times. These are small vessel strokes that, if you just have 1, its not a big deal. But if you have many of them over time, theres an association with dementia. Additionally, obese women without previous heart disease or diabetes were about twice as likely to have an ischemic stroke and African American women with- out previous history of heart disease or dia- betes were about 4 times as likely. These associations dont imply causa- tion. And while the risk of stroke is higher in high consumers of diet drinks, the actual ab- solute risk is small. The incidence rate is about 2 per 1000 people per year. JAMA: As you say, because this is an obser- vational study, we cant know if artificial sweeteners caused the strokes and heart at- tacks or if theyre just correlated. And, in fact, the women who drank the most artificially sweetened beverages on average were heavier, exercised less, consumed more calo- ries, had lower-quality diets, and were more likely to smoke and have a history of diabe- tes, heart attack, or stroke, correct? DR MOSSAVAR-RAHMANI: Thats cor- rect, yes. JAMA: To what extent were you able to control for these factors? DR MOSSAVAR-RAHMANI: We did con- trol for all these factors. However, there could be residual confounding. The diet qual- ity variable, for example, may not capture all the quality of the diet. The physical activity variable may not capture everything about someones physical activity. Were also limited by self-report. And were limited by the fact that we asked the question in 1996 to 2001. The diet drinks at that time were limited compared to whats available now. The answer is also depen- dent on what the women perceived diet drinks to be. And, also, we asked the ques- tion one time. We didnt continue to ask the question [over time]. So these are the limitations. The only way we can figure out if its the diet drink or something else thats causing [the increased risks] is to do a randomized clini- cal trial. JAMA: What about reverse causality? Isnt it possible that women with obesity who al- ready have a heightened stroke risk may be more likely to drink a lot of diet soda to try to control their weight? DR MOSSAVAR-RAHMANI: Thats one pos- sibility. We tried to control for obesity and body mass index in the models, but there is a possibility for residual confounding. We didnt, for example, know the prediabetic status of the women. If somebody was pre- diabetic and was trying to have artificially sweetened beverages [for that reason], we would not have been able to capture that. That data was not available. JAMA: The women only reported their ar- tificially sweetened beverage intake over one 3-month period, so you dont know what they were drinking before or after. How can this limitation be addressed in the future? DR MOSSAVAR-RAHMANI: The only way to address it is to do more studies. Follow the women over time and assess their artificial sweetened beverage consumption periodi- cally, maybe annually. JAMA: Are there other ways to refine the study design in an observational study? For example, using objective measures? DR MOSSAVAR-RAHMANI: Youd need to look at biomarkers for different artificial sweeteners. Maybe with metabolomics well get to that level at some point. A lot of these studies have specimens that have been col- lected, so future researchers can take a look at that. If we have the right biomarker for these beverages, we could. JAMA: Say the artificial sweeteners were causative. What are some of the mecha- nisms that could explain that? DR MOSSAVAR-RAHMANI: There are dif- ferent hypotheses. Theres some evidence that they may be changing the gut microbi- ome. That they may affect the way glucose is used. Ive also read theories about how they might affect how the brain processes or understands the taste sensation for sugar. I think we just need more evidence. JAMA: What does your gut tell you, so to speak? Do you think its correlation? Or cau- sation? Or both? DR MOSSAVAR-RAHMANI: My job is just to report what I found, which was correlation. My gut is that we just need more research. And, again, this was done at a time where there was a limited amount of artificially sweetened beverages. Now there are drinks made with ste- via, the natural sweeteners. There are syn- thetic sweeteners. There are nutritive sweet- eners like polyols and sugar alcohols. There are new items in the market that need to be tested, both in the microbiome and other parts of our physiology. JAMA: Are you at all concerned that, based on studies like these, people might switch from drinking artificially sweetened beverages, which the jury is still out on, to drinking sugary beverages, which we know are unhealthy? DR MOSSAVAR-RAHMANI: I think the mes- sage is that artificially sweetened bever- ages should be an interim step [before switching] to water. Im hoping that women dont go back to having sugary beverages. Note: Source references are available through embedded hyperlinks in the article text online. News & Analysis jama.com (Reprinted) JAMA April 23/30, 2019 Volume 321, Number 16 1555  2019 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ by a New York University User on 05/04/2019 https://doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.2008.27140 http://www.jama.com/?utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jama.2019.2123