Monster 2015-2016 El Nio Event Triggered Infectious Diseases Monster 2015-2016 El Nio Event Triggered Infectious Diseases An intense El Nio event in 2015-2016 fueled outbreaksofchikungunya,hantavirus,RiftVal- leyfever,cholera,andplaguearoundtheworld, according to a new report from US investiga- tors. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ranked this El Nio among the top 3 strongest events in nearly 70 years. Although its primarily a tropical phenom- enon, the El NioSouthern Oscillation has far-ranging effects on regional weather con- ditions. It can trigger extreme changes in rainfall, drought, and temperatures that cre- ate favorable ecological conditions for re- gional disease outbreaks. The research team analyzed patterns of disease outbreaks during the 2015-2016 El Nio phenomenon and compared them with climate anomalies obtained from sat- ellite data measuring land surface tempera- ture, vegetation, and precipitation. Shifts in rainfall, temperature, and vegetation re- sulted in both excessive drought and flood- ing in many regions throughout the world. Numerous disease outbreaks also oc- curred: cholera in Tanzania, dengue fever in Brazil and Southeast Asia, and plague and hantavirus in Colorado and New Mexico. It can take 2 to 3 months for diseases to de- velop following these weather changes. Plague in the western United States and cholera in Tanzania were associated with above-normal rainfall, while dengue in Brazil and Southeast Asia was associated with above-normal land surface temperature. Experts predict that regional weather anomalies like El Nio and its sister, La Nia, will increase in severity and frequency under current global warming scenarios. Informa- tion about the links between El Nio events and human and animal diseases are critical to disease control and prevention. Global satel- lite-based observation systems monitoring these events can help identify where and when disease outbreaks will occur and can aid in preventing and controlling their spread. Cancer Goes Undiagnosed in Almost Half the Worlds Children Almost half of all children around the world with cancerthe vast majority of whom live in low- and middle-income countriesare not diagnosed or treated, US researchers have reported. The investigators developed a simula- tion model of childhood cancer incidence by age group and tumor type in 200 countries and territories. They synthesized data from national cancer registries where they were available, along with data from the World Health Organizations Global Health Obser- vatory and from demographic health sur- veys and household surveys. The model estimated that in 2015 there were 397 000 cases of childhood cancer, but only 224 000 cases were diagnosed, leav- ing about 43% of childhood cancers undi- agnosed globally. In most regions of the world, acute lymphoblastic leukemia was the most common cancer. The numbers of undiagnosed cases var- ied substantially from region to region. In Africa, South Central Asia, and the Pacific Islands, more than half of all cases were un- diagnosed compared with only 3% that werent diagnosed in North America and Western Europe. Given population projections, the model estimated that 6.7 million cases of child- hood cancer worldwide could arise from 2015 to 2030. If health system perfor- mance continues at current levels, 2.9 mil- lion cases could be missed. The authors write that efforts are needed to strengthen health systems at every step of the care cascade, in- cluding developing cancer registries and health information systems. Models that es- timate the total incidence of childhood can- cer can help to guide health system plan- ning and inform new policies to improve care for children with cancer. Antimicrobial Resistance on the Rise in Zoonotic Bacteria in Europe Experts continue to find zoonotic bacteria with high levels of antimicrobial resistance in humans, animals, and food, according to a new report from the European Food Safety Authority and the European Centre for Dis- ease Prevention and Control. Their work shows that the antimicrobi- als used to treat zoonotic diseases, which hu- mans can contract through environmental exposure to infected animals or by eating contaminated meat, have grown less effec- tive over time. Investigators analyzed 2016 data from 28 European Union member states on anti- microbial resistance in bacterial isolates of Salmonella and Campylobacterthe 2 most common foodborne zoonotic bacteria in the European Unionas well as in Escherichia coli and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) isolates from animals and food. The agencies have been monitoring antimicrobial resistance in European Union countries since 2013. The report found very high (greater than 50%) to extremely high (greater than 70%) resistance levels to ciprofloxacin in Campylobacter jejuni isolates from humans and animals. Ciprofloxacin resistance ranged from 84.5% in Spain to 98% in Portugal. Resistance levels are so high in some countries that fluoroquinolones can no longer be routinely prescribed to treat Campylobacter infection. About one-third of Salmonella isolates from humans were resistant to sulfon- amides, ampicillin, or tetracyclines (29.2%), while resistance to third-generation cepha- losporins was low. The levels of antimicro- bial resistance in the Salmonella and Campy- lobacter isolates from poultry meat also were high.  M.J. Friedrich Note: Source references are available online through hyperlinks embedded in the article text. The 2015-2016 El Nio event triggered infectious disease outbreaks across the globe. Global Health N at io na lO ce an ic an d At m os ph er ic Ad m in ist ra tio n/ N at io na lE nv iro nm en ta lS at el lit e, D at a an d In fo rm at io n Se rv ic e News & Analysis 1448 JAMA April 16, 2019 Volume 321, Number 15 (Reprinted) jama.com  2019 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ by a New York University User on 05/04/2019 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6374399/pdf/41598_2018_Article_38034.pdf https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanonc/article/PIIS1470-2045(18)30909-4/fulltext https://ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/european-union-summary-report-antimicrobial-resistance-zoonotic-and-indicator-4 http://www.jama.com/?utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jama.2019.3155