Clopidogrel Use for Reducing the Rate of Thrombosis in a Rat Model of Microarterial Anastomosis ORIGINAL ARTICLE Clopidogrel Use for Reducing the Rate of Thrombosis in a Rat Model of Microarterial Anastomosis Vijay K. Nayak, MD; Daniel G. Deschler, MD Objectives: The national success rate for microvascular free tissue transfer is around 94%. However, in cases of failure, which is most often due to thrombosis in the vas- cular pedicle, the morbidity can be significant. Microvas- cular surgeons have used various pharmacologic agents to reduce thrombosis rates; however, none have been ideal. We examined the effects of clopidogrel bisulfate (Pla- vix), a member of the relatively new class of antiplatelet agents, on the rate of arterial thrombosis in a rat model. Design: Prospective randomized, blinded. Setting: Tertiary care academic medical center. Subjects: Male Sprague-Dawley rats weighing between 350 and 400 g. Intervention: Clopidogrel or placebo via gavage. After waiting 2 hours for absorption and activation, the tuck model of microvascular anastomosis was performed on both femoral arteries. Arteries were transected after 3 hours and patency was assessed. Main Outcome Measures: Bleeding time was ob- tained by determining the time to clot after removal of 2 mm from the tail tip. Vessel patency was assessed after 3 hours in the clopidogrel-treated and control groups. Results: Of 33 arteries, 19 (58%) in the control group developed complete thrombosis by the end of the pe- riod compared with only 6 (19%) of 32 arteries in the group that received clopidogrel. 2 Analysis revealed this to be significant (P=.001). The mean (SD) bleeding time in the control group was 158 (44) seconds compared with 233 (48) seconds in the clopidogrel group. Conclusions: Clopidogrel significantly reduced the rate of arterial thrombosis in a rat model of microvascular re- pair. The average bleeding time in the clopidogrel group was prolonged, suggesting that absorption and activa- tion occurred. These preliminary data suggest a poten- tial role for clopidogrel in select high-risk patients un- dergoing microvascular free tissue transfer. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2005;131:800-803 M ICROVASCULAR FREEtissue transfer revolu-tionized head andneck oncologic sur-gery. Lesions that were potentially unresectable owing to the re- sulting defect could now be recon- structed, returning both form and func- tion. Free tissue transfer has the advantage of immediate reconstruction in a single- stage procedure. With increased experi- ence, the current national success rate is approximately 94%.1-3 The significant mor- bidity and possible mortality associated with flap failure encourages further im- provements. Most flap failures are attributable to thrombosis within the anastomotic ves- sels.4 Improvements in technique, pedicle geometry, and patient selection have low- ered failure rates.5 In an effort to further increase success rates, surgeons have used a myriad of pharmacologic agents. The ideal agent would be effective, be easy to administer, have minimal adverse ef- fects, and be of low cost. Currently, none of the commonly used agents (dextran, as- pirin, or heparin) fulfill these criteria (Table 1). Clopidogrel bisulfate (Plavix; Bristol- Myers Squibb/Sanofi Pharmaceuticals Partnership, New York, NY) is a rela- tively new oral antiplatelet agent that inhibi ts adenosine diphosphate induced platelet activation by irrevers- ibly antagonizing the binding of this potent agonist to its receptor. Clopido- grel has shown efficacy in preventing thrombosis in clinical settings. The Clo- pidogrel Versus Aspirin in Patients at Risk of Ischaemic Events (CAPRIE) study was a prospective, randomized, double-blind trial that showed the effi- cacy of clopidogrel in reducing the com- Author Affiliations: Departments of Otolaryngology (Dr Nayak) and Head and Neck Surgery (Dr Deschler), Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston; and Department of Otology & Laryngology, Harvard Medical School, Boston (Drs Nayak and Deschler). (REPRINTED) ARCH OTOLARYNGOL HEAD NECK SURG/ VOL 131, SEP 2005 WWW.ARCHOTO.COM 800 2005 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ by a New York University User on 05/04/2019 bined risk of ischemic stroke, myocardial infarction, or vascular death when compared with aspirin.6 Adverse effects of clopidogrel were fewer than with aspirin and were primarily gastrointestinal discomfort and hemorrhage. Clopidogrel has also been shown to decrease the rate of thrombosis in an animal model. Bernat et al7 created a deep medial injury to the rat carotid artery with elec- trical stimulation. Inhibition of thrombosis occurred in a dose-dependent manner with increasing inhibition seen up to a dose of 5 mg/kg. Considering its improved efficacy over aspirin, which is routinely used by some microvascular surgeons in free tissue transfer, clopidogrel may be useful in the preven- tion of thrombosis in anastomotic vessels. Animal mod- els are routinely used to investigate the efficacy of phar- macologic agents prior to clinical use. The 4 characteristics of the ideal animal model of microvascular anastomosis have been defined by Kersh et al.8 First, a permanent vas- cular modification should be made to provide a contin- ued source of thrombogenesis. Second, the model should mimic clinical repair. Third, the diameter of the vessels should measure between 1 to 3 mm to allow for com- plete occlusion by a thrombus. Finally, thrombus for- mation should be gradual. The tuck model of microvascular thrombosis was refined by Stepnick et al.9 This model creates a throm- bogenic intimal flap within the lumen of the vessel (Figure). The introduction of adventitia into the lumen of a vessel has been theorized to be a possible cause of thrombosis in the microvascular pedicle. The procedure itself is technically simple and readily reproducible. Stepnick et al9 found that a 66% throm- bosis rate in rabbit femoral arteries usually occurred within 5 to 15 minutes. This rate of thrombosis is amenable to pharmacologic manipulation, and the model has been applied by Hadlock et al10 to rats. The rat is chosen because it is routinely used by training microvascular surgeons to practice anastomosis, pro- vides appropriately sized vessels, and is relatively inex- pensive. In the present study, the tuck model of microvascular anastomosis was performed in rats to determine the efficacy of clopidogrel in reducing rates of arterial thrombosis. METHODS ANIMAL MODEL Male Sprague-Dawley rats (Charles River Laboratories, Cam- bridge, Mass; weight range, 350-400 g) were used, following institutional guidelines regarding animal experimentation. The rats were anesthetized with intramuscular lidocaine hydrochlorideketamine hydrochloride (1:1). The femoral artery was isolated and cross-clamped, and 1% lidocaine hydrochloride was placed topically to prevent vasospasm. A 180 arteriotomy was then created. 10-0 Nylon monofilament suture was used to create a tuck of adventitia into the lumen of the vessel using the operating microscope and microvascu- lar instruments as described by Stepnick et al.9 Briefly, the suture was placed through the distal end of the vessel and brought out closer to the arteriotomy site, still on the distal side. The suture was then passed from within the lumen of the arteriotomy out through the proximal vessel wall (Figure). Additional sutures were placed to assure hemostasis as necessary. The cross-clamps were removed, and the vessel was observed for thrombosis over the next 3 hours. Immedi- ate patency of the vessel was determined by milking the blood out of the distal artery and assessing for refill. Any vessel not demonstrating refill after release of the cross-clamp was excluded. The contralateral femoral artery then underwent the same procedure. At the end of 3 hours, the vessel was transected and assessed for blood flow. Table 1. Properties of Commonly Used Antithrombotic Agents in Microvascular Surgery Agent Route Mechanism of Action Adverse Effects Aspirin PO/PR Arachidonic acid metabolism Nonspecific inhibition, GI upset Heparin IV Inhibits conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin Continuous infusion, fluid load, HIT syndrome Dextran IV Multiple effects on coagulation cascade Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, renal failure, anaphylaxis Abbreviations: GI, gastrointestinal; HIT, heparin-induced thrombocytopenia; IV, intravenous; PO/PR, by mouth/by rectum. C A B Figure. Schematic of tuck model of microvascular anastamosis.9 A, The suture is placed through the distal end of the vessel and brought out closer to the arteriotomy site, still on the distal side. B, The suture is then passed from within the lumen of the arteriotomy out through the proximal vessel wall. C, Cross section shows a tuck of vessel wall occurs on tying down suture. (REPRINTED) ARCH OTOLARYNGOL HEAD NECK SURG/ VOL 131, SEP 2005 WWW.ARCHOTO.COM 801 2005 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ by a New York University User on 05/04/2019 EXPERIMENTAL PROTOCOL Two hours prior to surgery, half of the rats were administered a 5 mg/kg bolus of clopidogrel bisulfate dissolved in isotonic sodium chloride solution (pH 2) via gavage in a coded, blinded, randomized fashion. This is the lowest dose that has been shown to maximally prevent thrombosis.7 The other half received iso- tonic sodium chloride solution (pH 2) alone. Bleeding time was ascertained by removing the distal 2 mm of the tail and mea- suring the time until clot in 15-second increments, as previ- ously described.11 Statistical analysis was performed using 2 tests. RESULTS There was 1 death from anesthesia-related complica- tions prior to surgery. Three vessels had excessive bleeding after release of the cross-clamps and were not included (2 in the clopidogrel group and 1 in the con- trol group). Two vessels, both from the clopidogrel group, clotted immediately after release of the cross- clamps and were excluded. This left 65 vessels in the study. Of 33 arteries, 19 (58%) in the control group demonstrated thrombosis. Of 32 vessels, 6 (19%) in the clopidogrel group had thrombosis. 2 Analysis showed this to be significant (P = .001) (Table 2). The mean (SD) bleeding time in the control group was 158 (44) seconds compared with 233 (48) seconds in the clopidogrel group. COMMENT Clopidogrel is an antiplatelet agent that has been shown to prevent thrombosis in both clinical trials and animal models.6,7 The aim of the present study was to deter- mine the efficacy of clopidogrel in reducing the rate of arterial thrombosis in a rat model of microvascular anas- tomosis. The mechanism of action of clopidogrel is irrevers- ible binding of the adenosine diphosphate receptor on platelets. Adenosine diphosphate is a potent activator of platelets and stimulates aggregation. Platelet aggre- gation is considered to be primarily responsible for arterial thrombosis.12 Bernat et al7 caused electrical injury to the rat carotid artery and found an increasing reduction in rates of thrombosis up to a clopidogrel bisulfate dose of 5 mg/kg, which was the dose used in the present study. To assure consistent, reliable dos- ing, the medication was administered by gavage. This required that the clopidogrel be administered in acidic solution because it is only freely soluble at a low pH. Once absorbed, the majority of the clopidogrel is acti- vated by the liver within 2 hours.13 There was a significant reduction in the rate of throm- bosis in the rat arterial tuck model with clopidogrel vs placebo (19% vs 58%; 2 test, P=.001). The tuck model of microvascular anastomosis satisfies the criteria stipu- lated by Kersh et al8 for an ideal animal model. The 58% rate of thrombosis in our control group compares favor- ably with the 66% rate that Stepnick et al9 found in the rabbit model. Prior to undertaking this study, we chose to exclude any vessels that had thrombosed immedi- ately on releasing of the clamps because it suggests an error in technique. Of 67 evaluable vessels, 2 were ex- cluded for this reason. Both were in the clopidogrel wing of the study. Clopidogrel affects platelet function that can be as- sessed by bleeding time. Bleeding time was determined by a previously described technique that involved re- moving the distal 2 mm of the tail and measuring the time to clot.11 The average bleeding time in the rats receiving clopidogrel was elevated when compared with controls (233 vs 158 seconds), suggesting both absorption and activation of the compound. The wide variation in bleed- ing times is attributable to the subjective nature of the test, which has led to its decreased use in clinical set- tings. Other methods of assessing platelet function in- clude ex vivo aggregation studies, which require special- ized equipment. There are characteristics of clopidogrel that confer advantages over other prophylactic, antithrombotic, pharmacologic agents currently in use. The adverse effects of clopidogrel are primarily gastrointestinal upset and hemorrhage. The neutropenia that is seen with other antiplatelet agents, such as ticlopidine hydrochloride, is not found in clopidogrel.13 Although it requires oral administration, bolus dosing is possible and attains high levels within 2 hours of administra- tion. It could be administered intraoperatively and have an almost immediate effect. Although arterial thrombosis is a cause of flap fail- ure, venous thrombosis is considered to be a more com- mon cause. The slower flow rate in the venous system is believed to result in fibrin-rich clots.12 Although clopi- dogrel is an antiplatelet compound, it has reduced ve- nous thrombosis in a rabbit model.14 Further studies are under way to determine the efficacy of clopidogrel in re- ducing venous thrombosis in a microvascular model. Yet, clinical situations may arise in which a specific intraop- erative issue with the arterial anastomosis is noted, which could increase the risk of thrombosis, such as intimal tear- ing, vessel mismatch, or another technical problem. In these cases, a prophylactic antithrombotic agent might be considered. This study demonstrates the efficacy of clopidogrel in preventing thrombosis in an arterial mi- crovascular anastomosis at risk. Currently, there is no standard of antithrombotic prophylaxis in the setting of free tissue transfer sur- gery. Numerous high-volume centers have differing Table 2. Rate of Thrombosis in Rat Femoral Arteries 3 Hours After Undergoing Microarterial Anastomosis With the Tuck Model* Group Patent Thrombosed Total Control 14 (42) 19 (58) 33 (100) Clopidogrel 26 (81) 6 (19) 32 (100) *Data are given as number (percentage). Three vessels were excluded for excessive bleeding (2 from the control group and 1 from the clopidogrel group). Two vessels were excluded for no-flow immediately after release of clamps (both from the clopidogrel group). 2 Test, P = .001. (REPRINTED) ARCH OTOLARYNGOL HEAD NECK SURG/ VOL 131, SEP 2005 WWW.ARCHOTO.COM 802 2005 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ by a New York University User on 05/04/2019 protocol varying from no prophylaxis to the use of dextran, aspirin, or heparin. This study sought to demonstrate the potential efficacy of clopidogrel in preventing arterial thrombosis compared with placebo. With this established, future study will evaluate the relative efficacy of this drug in comparison with other accepted antithrombotic agents. In summary, clopidogrel has the potential to in- crease success rates in patients undergoing microvascu- lar free tissue transfer. The desire to prevent thrombosis must be tempered by the knowledge that excessive an- ticoagulation could result in a hematoma or other sig- nificant complications. Because most patients may not require any pharmacologic intervention, by determin- ing the characteristics of high-risk patients, the use of clo- pidogrel could be reserved for these situations. Submitted for Publication: March 2, 2005; accepted April 11, 2005. Correspondence: Daniel G. Deschler, MD, Head and Neck Surgery, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Depart- ment of Otology & Laryngology, Harvard Medical School, 243 Charles St, Boston, MA 02114 (Daniel_deschler @meei.harvard.edu). Financial Disclosure: None. Funding/Support: This study was supported by an In- vestigator Development Award from the American Acad- emy of Facial Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Alex- andria, Va. Previous Presentation: This study was presented as a poster at the Annual Fall Meeting of the American Acad- emy of Facial Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery (AAF- PRS); September 21, 2004; New York, NY. REFERENCES 1. Schusterman MA, Miller MJ, Reece GP, Kroll SS, Marchi M, Goepfert H. A single centers experience with 308 free flaps for repair of head and neck cancer defects. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1994;93:472-478. 2. Nakatsuka T, Karii K, Asato H, et al. Analytic review of 2372 free flap transfers for head and neck reconstruction following cancer resection. J Reconstr Microsurg. 2003;19:363-368. 3. Eckardt A, Fokas K. Microsurgical reconstruction in the head and neck region: an 18-year experience with 500 consecutive cases. J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2003; 31:197-201. 4. Khouri RK, Cooley BC, Kenna DM, Edstrom LE. Thrombosis of microvascular anastomoses in traumatized vessels: fibrin versus platelets. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1990;86:110-117. 5. Blackwell KE, Brown MR, Gonzalez D. Overcoming the learning curve in micro- vascular head and neck reconstruction. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1997; 123:1332-1335. 6. CAPRIE Steering Committee. A randomized, blinded trial of clopidogrel versus aspirin in patients at risk of ischemic events (CAPRIE). Lancet. 1996;348:1329- 1339. 7. Bernat A, Mares AM, Defreyn G, Maffrand JP, Herbert JM. Effect of various an- tiplatelet agents on acute arterial thrombosis in the rat. Thromb Haemost. 1993; 70:812-816. 8. Kersh R, Handren J, Hergrueter C, May JW Jr. Microvascular surgical experi- mental thrombosis model: rationale and design. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1989; 83:866-872. 9. Stepnick D, Hayden R, Hogikyan N. Development of thrombosis models in the rabbit. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1994;120:997-1002. 10. Hadlock TA, Kim J, Deschler DG. The effect of subcutaneously administered low- molecular-weight heparin on microarterial thrombosis in the rat. Arch Facial Plast Surg. 2003;5:36-39. 11. Dejana E, Villa S, Gaetano G. Bleeding time in rats: a comparison of different ex- perimental conditions. Thromb Haemost. 1982;48:108-111. 12. Esclamado RM, Carroll WR. The pathogenesis of vascular thrombosis and its impact in microvascular surgery. Head Neck. 1999;21:355-362. 13. Jarvis B, Simpson K. Clopidogrel: a review of its use in the prevention of atherothrombosis. Drugs. 2000;60:347-377. 14. Herbert JM, Tissinier A, Defreyn G, Maffrand JP. Inhibitory effect of clopidogrel on platelet adhesion and intimal proliferation after arterial injury in rabbits. Arterioscler Thromb. 1993;13:1171-1179. (REPRINTED) ARCH OTOLARYNGOL HEAD NECK SURG/ VOL 131, SEP 2005 WWW.ARCHOTO.COM 803 2005 American Medical Association. All rights reserved. Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ by a New York University User on 05/04/2019