Prevalence and clinical characteristics of prion diseases Prion diseases or transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) are neurological disorders, characterized by dementia and movement disorder. Histopathological changes of the brain comprise a fine vacuolation, also termed spongiosis, reactive changes of astrocytes (gliosis) and variable loss of neurons. Typical examples of TSEs in humans are Creutzfeldt- Jakob disease (Creutzfeldt, 1920) and Gerstmann-Straussler- Scheinker syndrome (Gerstmann et al. 1936) which were first described in the second and third decade of the 20th century. While the prototype of prion diseases in animals, scrapie in sheep and goats, has been known for more than two centuries, a new form of animal prion disease designated bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) has since its first recognition in 1986 developed into an epizootic (Wilesmith et al. 1992; Anderson et al. 1996). The emergence of a new variant form of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (nvCJD) in young people in the UK has raised the possibility that BSE has spread to humans by dietary exposure (Will et al. 1996, 1999). This fearful scenario has recently been supported by experimental evidence claiming that the agent causing BSE is indistinguishable from that causing nvCJD (Hill et al. 1997a). The molecular biology of prions Although there is an increasing body of evidence, that the infectious agent of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, the prion, partially or entirely consists of an abnormally folded protein (McKinley et al. 1983; Prusiner et al. 1983; Oesch et al. 1985), the nature of this agent is still under debate. The possibility that the agent consists of viral particles can almost certainly be ruled out, since no nucleic acids have been detected. Since prions are distinguished from conventional agents by their physicochemical properties, the protein-only hypothesis has been formulated firstly by Griffith (1967) and later, supported by additional experimental data by Prusiner (1982). He coined the term prion, composed from the words proteinaceous infectious agent. The hypothesis states that the agent is devoid of nucleic acid and consists solely of an abnormal conformer of the cellular prion protein, PrP C . It has been proposed that the partially protease-resistant and detergent-insoluble PrP Sc is congruent with the infectious agent. Two distinct models have been postulated to explain the mechanism by which a misfolded form of PrP could catalyse the refolding of native PrP molecules into the abnormal Special Review Series  Gene Manipulation and Integrative Physiology Neuroinvasion of prions: insights from mouse models Sebastian Brandner*, Michael A. Klein, Rico Frigg, Valdimir Pekarik, Petra Parizek, Alex Raeber, Markus Glatzel, Petra Schwarz, Thomas Rulicke, Charles Weissmann and Adriano Aguzzi Institute of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology, Schmelzbergstrasse 12, University Hospital, 8091 Zurich, Switzerland The prion was defined by Stanley B. Prusiner as the infectious agent that causes transmissible spongiform encephalopathies. A pathological protein accumulating in the brain of scrapie-infected hamsters was isolated in 1982 and termed prion protein (PrP Sc ). Its cognate gene Prnp was identified more than a decade ago by Charles Weissmann, and shown to encode the host protein PrP C . Since the latter discovery, transgenic mice have contributed many important insights into the field of prion biology, including the understanding of the molecular basis of the species barrier for prions. By disrupting the Prnp gene, it was shown that an organism that lacks PrP C is resistant to infection by prions. Introduction of mutant PrP genes into PrP-deficient mice was used to investigate the structureactivity relationship of the PrP gene with regard to scrapie susceptibility. Ectopic expression of PrP in PrP knockout mice proved a useful tool for the identification of host cells competent for prion replication. Finally, the availability of PrP knockout mice and transgenic mice overexpressing PrP allows selective reconstitution experiments aimed at expressing PrP in neurografts or in specific populations of haemato- and lymphopoietic cells. The latter studies have allowed us to clarify some of the mechanisms of prion spread and disease pathogenesis. Experimental Physiology (2000) 85.6, 705712. Publication of The Physiological Society * Corresponding author: seb@pathol.unizh.ch 2091 ) by guest on October 25, 2013ep.physoc.orgDownloaded from Exp Physiol ( ) by guest on October 25, 2013ep.physoc.orgDownloaded from Exp Physiol ( ) by guest on October 25, 2013ep.physoc.orgDownloaded from Exp Physiol ( ) by guest on October 25, 2013ep.physoc.orgDownloaded from Exp Physiol ( ) by guest on October 25, 2013ep.physoc.orgDownloaded from Exp Physiol ( ) by guest on October 25, 2013ep.physoc.orgDownloaded from Exp Physiol ( ) by guest on October 25, 2013ep.physoc.orgDownloaded from Exp Physiol ( ) by guest on October 25, 2013ep.physoc.orgDownloaded from Exp Physiol ( http://ep.physoc.org/ http://ep.physoc.org/ http://ep.physoc.org/ http://ep.physoc.org/ http://ep.physoc.org/ http://ep.physoc.org/ http://ep.physoc.org/ http://ep.physoc.org/ conformation and both models are the subjects of intensive investigation: (i) the template-directed model, and (ii) the nucleation-seeding model (Fig. 1). The first model assumes a PrP Sc monomer promoting the conformational conversion of PrP C , or of a partially destabilized intermediate, into the PrP Sc conformation (Prusiner, 1991). In this model PrP Sc would be intrinsically more stable than PrP C , but kinetically inaccessible. In the second model, formation of PrP Sc would be initiated by a seed of aggregated PrP Sc triggering a nucleation-dependent polymerization process (Jarrett & Lansbury, 1993). In contrast to the template-directed model, the PrP Sc monomer is less stable than PrP C but is stabilized upon joining to the PrP Sc aggregate. However, both models demand an experimental proof. Consistent with the nucleation model, cell-free conversion studies indicate that PrP Sc aggregates are able to convert PrP C into a protease-resistant PrP isoform. On the other hand, Riesner (Riesner et al. 1996) demonstrated that aggregates of PrP Sc do not necessarily contain infectivity. The role of PrP in prion disease According to the protein-only hypothesis, PrP C is a substrate for the PrP Sc -mediated conversion of PrP C into new PrP Sc molecules. An important corollary to this hypothesis is that an organism lacking PrP C should be resistant to scrapie and unable to propagate the infectious agent. To this end, Bueler and colleagues generated mice with a targeted disruption of the Prnp gene (Bueler et al. 1992). Although the ubiquitous expression of PrP in the developing and adult central nervous system (CNS) suggested a significant role in development and function of the CNS, the resulting mice showed no overt phenotype. In particular, they show no developmental defects, no behavioural abnormalities and have a normal life expectancy. Intracerebral inoculation of these mice with prions revealed that they were resistant and did not propagate the agent, S. Brandner and others Exp. Physiol. 85.6706 Figure 1 Models for the conformational conversion of PrP C into PrP Sc . Upper panel, the template-directed refolding model postulates an interaction between exogenously produced PrP Sc and endogenous PrP C , which is induced to transform itself into further PrP Sc . A high energy barrier may prevent spontaneous conversion of PrP C into PrP Sc . Sporadic CJD may arise when spontaneous mutations in single cells lead to the conversion from PrP C to PrP Sc and give rise to manifold subsequent conversions. Lower panel, the seeding or nucleation model proposes that PrP C and Prp Sc are in a reversible thermodynamic equilibrium. Only if several monomeric PrP Sc molecules are mounted up to a highly ordered seed, can further monomeric PrP Sc be recruited and eventually aggregated to amyloid. The likelihood of spontaneous formation of a seed is a function of the local PrP Sc concentration (which may be modulated by PrP Sc -binding proteins) and is inversely dependent upon the number of monomers needed to form a proto-seed. Within such a crystal-like seed, PrP Sc becomes stabilized. Fragmentataion of PrP Sc aggregates increases the number of nuclei which can recruit further PrP Sc and therefore results in apparent replication of the agent. thereby verifying the prediction of the protein-only hypothesis (Bueler et al. 1993; Sailer et al. 1994). Heterozygous mice with only one disrupted allele (Prnp + 0 ) also showed partial resistance to scrapie infection as manifested by prolonged incubation times of about 290 days compared with about 160 days in Prnp ++ mice (Bueler et al. 1994). This suggests that the amount of PrP C protein in the brain is a rate-limiting step in the development of the disease may point to therapeutic efforts aimed at reducing the production of the normal PrP C isoform. Prion neurotoxicity: the neurografting approach What is the pathogenetic event that impairs the central nervous system? It is a common belief, that deposits of pathological prion protein are to blame by inducing neuronal cell death (Fairbairn et al. 1994; Giese et al. 1995), and among several possible factors are elevated cytokine levels in the brain (Campbell et al. 1994; Williams et al. 1994). To clarify, whether or to what extent prions are directly neurotoxic, we introduced a transplant which continuously delivered PrP Sc into the brains of Prnp 00 mice. This was accomplished by grafting neural tissue overexpressing PrP into the brain of PrP-deficient mice (Fig. 2). After intracerebral inoculation with scrapie prions, these grafts not only developed severe signs of neurodegeneration (Fig. 3) (Brandner et al. 1996, 1998) but also accumulated high levels of PrP Sc and infectivity. Substantial amounts of graft-derived PrP Sc migrated even into distant areas of the host brain which then contained substantial amounts of infectivity. But surprisingly, these brain areas did not show pathological changes, not even in the immediate vicinity of the grafts or the PrP deposits (Fig. 3) (Brandner et al. 1996). We concluded that PrP Sc is inherently non-toxic and PrP Sc plaques found in spongiform encephalopathies may be an epiphenomenon rather than a cause of neuronal damage. It is conceivable that PrP Sc is only toxic when it is formed and accumulated within the cell but not when presented from outside. Results from other researchers suggest that microglia may play a certain role in mediating the toxic effect from PrP Sc on PrP C -expressing neurons. The neuroinvasion of prions Although the intracerebral application is by far the most effective route for prion infection, oral uptake is the epidemiologically more relevant. This route is thought to be responsible for the transmission not only of BSE but also of new variant CJD (Hill et al. 1997b). Since prion diseases primarily manifest as a disease of the CNS, invasion of prions from the periphery must be of crucial importance and, considering the precision of incubation times even after intra- peritoneal inoculation, are tightly controlled. We therefore set out to elucidate the mechanisms of prion spread from periphery to the CNS. In a first set of experiments, we asked whether prions can migrate from the periphery to a graft in the CNS of a Prnp 00 mouse: intraperitoneal inoculation of such grafted Neuroinvasion of prions: insights from mouse modelsExp. Physiol. 85.6 707 Figure 2 Schematic drawing of the transplantation procedure to obtain PrP-expressing grafts within the brain of Prnp 00 mice. Transgenic mice overexpressing PrP (termed tga20) were mated and embryos were removed at day 13.5. The neuroectodermal brain anlage was removed and transplanted into the brain of an adult recipient (Prnp 00 )mouse, where it differentiates into mature neuroectoderm. Inoculation with prions was carried out at various time points after transplantation. mice did not provoke any disease in the graft and did not result in accumulation of prions in the spleen (Blattler et al. 1997). In contrast, wild-type mice develop scrapie and accumulate high titres of infectivity in the lymphoreticular system, shortly after intraperitoneal or intracerebral inoculation. Then we asked, whether transfer of wild-type bone marrow to into prnp 00 mice would restore prion replication. First, Prnp 00 mice received intracerebral grafts of Prnp overexpressing cells which eventually serves as an indicator for infectivity brought into the CNS. Then, these mice were irradiated and received bone marrow from wild-type mice. After peripheral prion infection, there was infectivity detectable in the spleen, but surprisingly no disease in the CNS graft. We concluded, that the transport from the spleen to the CNS requires another tissue compartment, which is not restored by bone marrow reconstitution (Blattler et al. 1997). A possible candidate is the peripheral nervous system, as suggested by indirect findings. The role of the lymphoreticular system in the neuroinvasion of prions Several studies indicate an important role of lymphoid organs in prion replication, but there is little knowledge about which cells support prion propagation in the lymphoreticular system. Whole-body ionizing radiation studies in mice after intra- peritoneal infection have suggested that the critical cells are long lived (Fraser & Farquhar, 1987). Follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) are possible candidates (Kitamoto et al. 1991), and S. Brandner and others Exp. Physiol. 85.6708 Figure 3 Non-infected neural grafts in brains of Prnp 00 mice. Upper row (ad), healthy control graft 230 days after mock inoculation. The graft is located in the third ventricle of the recipient mouse (a, see asterisks, haematoxylineosin), and shows no spongiform change, little gliosis (b, immunostain for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)), and strong expression of synaptophysin (c) and of PrP C (d). Middle row (eh), scrapie infected graft 235 days after inoculation with increased cellularity (e), brisk gliosis (f) and a significant loss of synaptophysin (g) and PrP (h) staining intensity is shown. Bottom row, high magnification of a similar chronically infected graft shows characteristic pathological changes. i, appearance of large vacuoles and ballooned neurons (arrow). In the GFAP immunostain (j), astrocytes appear wrapped around densely packed neurons. Glandular deposits and intracytoplasmic accumulation of synaptophysin (k) and PrP immunoreactivity (l) in the cytoplasm of neurons. indeed PrP Sc accumulates in these cells of wild-type mice and in mice with a selective T cell defect. Further evidence for the importance of follicular dendritic cells came from experiments with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice whose FDCs are thought to be functionally impaired. In these mice, intraperitoneal infection does not lead to replication of prions in the spleen nor in the CNS. Reconstitution of SCID mice with wild-type spleen cells restores susceptibility to scrapie after peripheral infection (Fraser et al. 1996). These findings suggest that components of the immune system are required for efficient transfer of prions from the periphery to the CNS. Thus, we analysed the role of other components of the immune system which may contribute to neuroinvasion of prions. We used mice with genetically engineered selective inactivation of specific component of the immune system. We used mice with defects of B and T cells (RAG_2  , RAG_1  and SCID mice) and AGR  mice with an additional defect of interferon  and interferon_. Defects of B cells alone were assessed with MT  mice which not produce any immunoglobulins but have complete and functional Neuroinvasion of prions: insights from mouse modelsExp. Physiol. 85.6 709 Figure 4 Latency of scrapie in various strains of immunodeficient mice. B cell-deficient mice remained healthy after i.p. inoculation with the Rocky Mountain Laboratory (RML) scrapie prion strain as 100 l of a 10 or a 10 dilution of a scrapie-infected brain homogenate (A; open circles). In contrast, all mice developed spongiform encephalography after i.c. inoculation (B), regardless of their immune status. The horizontal lines represent mean values. T cell subsets. Isolated T cell defects were investigated with CD4  , CD8  , -microglobulin- or Perforin-deficient mice. We found that defects affecting T cells had no apparent effect on the incubation time after i.p. inoculation while all mutations that disrupted the differentiation of B cells prevented the development of clinical scrapie in i.p. inoculated mice (Fig. 4A). Intracerebral inoculation of all these mice, however, did not reveal any difference between the different groups (Fig. 4B). These results seem to indicate a crucial role for B cells in the propagation of scrapie after peripheral infection (Klein et al. 1997). However, since mice devoid of B cells fail to produce antibodies, and FDCs fail to develop in their lymphoid organs, we asked which of these three factors might be responsible for prion pathogenesis. Thus two further mouse strains were investigated. To elucidate the role of immuno- globulins we analysed mice producing antibody exclusively of the IgM subclass (t11 MT), which had no detectable specificity for PrP C . The role of FDCs was addressed using mice that lacked functional FDCs (TNFR1  ) but have differentiated B cells. Both strains developed scrapie after peripheral inoculation and again supported the notion of a crucial role for differentiated B cells in neuroinvasive scrapie (Klein et al. 1997). PrP expression in B cells is not necessary for prion neuroinvasion Replication of prions and their transport from the periphery to the CNS relies on the expression of PrP C on lymphocytes. Thus we further asked, whether expression of PrP C on B cells was a prerequisite for neuroinvasion of prions. Again, mice with various immune defects (SCID, RAG 1  and MT  ) were used for adoptive transfer of fetal liver cells either from wild- type or from Prnp 00 mice. This reconstitution induced the formation of germinal centres in spleens of all mice, including differentiation of FDCs. As control, we used B and T cell- deficient mice reconstituted with FLCs from (B cell-deficient) MT embryos, and found no follicular dendritic cells in accordance with the notion that B cells or products thereof are required for FDC maturation. Reconstituted mice were challenged i.p. with scrapie prions. Surprisingly, all mice that received FLCs of either genotype, Prnp ++ or Prnp 00 , from immunocompetent donors developed scrapie after inoculation with a high dose of prions, and most mice after a low dose. Transfer of FLCs from MT donors, as well as omission of the adoptive transfer procedure, did not restore susceptibility to disease in any of the immunodeficient mice challenged with the low dose. In a further step we asked whether spleen PrP Sc S. Brandner and others Exp. Physiol. 85.6710 Figure 5 Spleen history of Rag-1  mice reconstituted with Prnp 00 fetal liver cells. Upper row, paraffin sections stained with hemalaun before FLC transfer (left). No B cell follicles and germinal centres were discernible in Rag-1  mice. Restoration of organized B cell follicles and germinal centres after FLC reconstruction (middle, magnification  200). Frozen sections immunostained with antibody FDC-M1 revealed formation of prominent FDC clusters with germinal centres after FLC transfer (right, magnification,  250). Lower row, confocal double-colour immunofluorescence analysis of splenic germinal centres in Rag-1  mice reconstituted with Prnp 00 FLCs after i.p. inoculation with RML prions. Sections were stained with antibody FDC-M1 to follicular dendritic cells (left) and with antiserum R340 to PrP (middle). Regions in which both signals are detectable appear as a bright network within the follicle centre (right, magnification  250). Most of the PrP signal in germinal centres appeared to co-localize with the FDC-network. was associated with FDCs in FLC reconstituted mice. With double-colour immunofluorescence confocal microscopy we detected deposits of PrP-immunoreactive material in germinal centres in spleens of reconstituted mice which largely co_localized with the follicular dendritic network (Fig. 5) (Klein et al. 1998). These results support our notion that cells whose maturation depends on B cells are responsible for accumulation of prions in spleen. The most likely candidates are FDCs, since their maturation correlates with the presence of B cells and the formation of immune complexes. On the other hand, it is equally possible that the follicular dendritic network serves as a reservoir for the accumulation and multiplication of prions. Other B cell-dependent processes could enable the transfer of prions to autonomic nerve terminals or the agent may be transported on or within B cells directly within peripheral lymphoid tissue. Alternatively, anti- bodies or other factors may bind prions, especially since PrP can be detected by immunohistochemical stains in the germinal centre area where immune complexing occurs, and this formation may be of importance for mediating neuroinvasion and facilitating the access to peripheral nervous system terminals. Current threats and future perspectives What are the implications of the above findings in the framework of the current epidemics of BSE and the occurrence of nvCJD? For one thing, there is some evidence that nvCJD is more lymphotropic than sporadic CJD, since nvCJD but not sporadic CJD prions have been detected in tonsils and appendix. Therefore understanding the peripheral pathogenesis is of immediate importance in assessing risks of iatrogenic transmission of human BSE via exposure to blood or tissues from preclinical cases, and possibly from contaminated surgical instruments, or even blood and blood products. It is unfortunate that little is known about the distribution of preclinical disease in the UK, leaving the actual persistence of the agent in the population entirely obscure. What is particularly unsettling about this lack of knowledge is the fact that sensitive and reliable assays are now available for detection of PrP Sc in lymphatic tissues of cadavers, and these assays have been shown to constitute reliable indicators of nvCJD. Given that the most problematic aspect in public health decision-making is the uncertainty in prevalence of subclinical disease, the use of such assays for unlinked anonymous surveys of post-mortem material would seem to be logical, imperative and extremely urgent for planning measures aimed at limiting the spread of nvCJD among humans. Our results indicate that follicular dendritic cells are most probably the prion reservoir in lymphatic organs but also splenic lymphocytes of experimentally inoculated mice can be infected with prions. This finding raises an alert, because blood lymphocytes might well be in equilibrium with their splenic counterparts and may be relevant if blood donors are subclinical carriers of the nvCJD agent (Aguzzi, 1997). However, there are still controversies as to whether depletion of leucocytes in blood products is necessary andor sufficient to effectively prevent any possible risk. Another consideration applies to secondary prophylaxis. As mentioned above, there might be a considerable number of preclinically infected people (Aguzzi & Collinge, 1997) who may have acquired infectious BSE material via the human food chain. It is a pressing issue to develop approaches that will help control spread of the agent and that will hopefully prevent the clinical outbreak of symptoms in these persons. In light of the above findings, possible targets for the interference with neuroinvasion are rate-limiting processes that control prion replication within the infected individual. In light of the knowledge discussed above, treatments that target the neuro- immune interface of prion replication and neuroinvasion seem a promising area for research aimed at post-exposure prophylaxis. Aguzzi, A. (1997). Neuro-immune connection in spread of prions in the body? Lancet 349, 742743. Aguzzi, A. & Collinge, J. (1997). Post-exposure prophylaxis after accidental prion inoculation. Lancet 350, 15191520. Blattler, T., Brandner, S., Raeber, A. J., Klein, M. A., Voigtlander, T., Weissmann, C. & Aguzzi, A. (1997). PrP- expressing tissue required for transfer of scrapie infectivity from spleen to brain. Nature 389, 6973. Brandner, S., Isenmann, S., Kuhne, G. & Aguzzi, A. (1998). Identification of the end stage of scrapie using infected neural grafts. Brain Pathology 8, 1927. Brandner, S., Isenmann, S., Raeber, A., Fischer, M., Sailer, A., Kobayashi, Y., Marino, S., Weissmann, C. & Aguzzi, A. (1996). Normal host prion protein necessary for scrapie-induced neurotoxicity. Nature 379, 339343. Bueler, H., Raeber, A., Sailer, A., Fischer, M., Aguzzi, A. & Weissmann, C. (1994). High prion and PrPSc levels but delayed onset of disease in scrapie-inoculated mice heterozygous for a disrupted PrP gene. Molecular Medicine 1, 1930. Bueler, H. R., Aguzzi, A., Sailer, A., Greiner, R. A., Autenried, P., Aguet, M. & Weissmann, C. (1993). Mice devoid of PrP are resistant to scrapie. Cell 73, 13391347. Bueler, H. R., Fischer, M., Lang, Y., Bluethmann, H., Lipp, H. P., Dearmond, S. J., Prusiner, S. B., Aguet, M. & Weissmann, C. (1992). Normal development and behaviour of mice lacking the neuronal cell-surface PrP protein. Nature 356, 577582. Campbell, I. L., Eddleston, M., Kemper, P., Oldstone, M. B. & Hobbs, M. V. (1994). Activation of cerebral cytokine gene expression and its correlation with onset of reactive astrocyte and acute-phase response gene expression in scrapie. Journal of Virology 68, 23832387. Chazot, G., Broussolle, E., Lapras, C., Blattler, T., Aguzzi, A. & Kopp, N. (1996). New variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in a 26- year-old French man [letter]. Lancet 347, 1181. Creutzfeldt, H. G. (1920). Uber eine eigenartige herdformige Erkrankung des Zentralnervensystems. Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft fur Neurologie und Psychiatrie 57, 119. Fairbairn, D. W., Carnahan, K. G., Thwaits, R. N., Grigsby, R. V., Holyoak, G. R. & ONeill, K. L. (1994). Detection of apoptosis induced DNA cleavage in scrapie-infected sheep brain. FEMS Microbiology Letters 115, 341346. Neuroinvasion of prions: insights from mouse modelsExp. Physiol. 85.6 711 Fraser, H., Brown, K. L., Stewart, K., McConnell, I., McBride, P. & Williams, A. (1996). Replication of scrapie in spleens of scid mice follows reconstitution with wild-type mouse bone marrow. Journal of General Virology 77, 19351940. Fraser, H. & Farquhar, C. F. (1987). Ionising radiation has no influence on scrapie incubation period in mice. Veterinary Microbiology 13, 211223. Gerstmann, J., Straussler, E. & Scheinker, I. (1936). Uber eine eigenartige hereditar-familiare Erkrankung des Zentralnerven- systems. Zugleich ein Beitrag zur Frage des vorzeitigen lokalen Alterns. Zeitschrift fur Neurologie 154, 736762. Giese, A., Groschup, M. H., Hess, B. & Kretzschmar, H. A. (1995). Neuronal cell death in scrapie-infected mice is due to apoptosis. Brain Pathology 5, 213221. Griffith, J. S. (1967). Self-replication and scrapie. Nature 215, 10431044. Hill, A. F., Desbruslais, M., Joiner, S., Sidle, K. C., Gowland, I., Collinge, J., Doey, L. J. & Lantos, P. (1997a). The same prion strain causes vCJD and BSE [letter] [see comments]. Nature 389, 448450. Hill, A. F., Zeidler, M., Ironside, J. & Collinge, J. (1997b). Diagnosis of new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease by tonsil biopsy. Lancet 349, 99. Jarrett, J. T. & Lansbury, P. T. Jr (1993). Seeding one-dimensional crystallization of amyloid: a pathogenic mechanism in Alzheimers disease and scrapie? Cell 73, 10551058. Kitamoto, T., Muramoto, T., Mohri, S., Dohura, K. & Tateishi, J. (1991). Abnormal isoform of prion protein accumulates in follicular dendritic cells in mice with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Journal of Virology 65, 62926295. Klein, M. A., Frigg, R., Flechsig, E., Raeber, A. J., Kalinke, U., Bluethmann, H., Bootz, F., Suter, M., Zinkernagel, R. M. & Aguzzi, A. (1997). A crucial role for B cells in neuroinvasive scrapie. Nature 390, 687690. Klein, M. A., Frigg, R., Raeber, A. J., Flechsig, E., Hegyi, I., Zinkernagel, R. M., Weissmann, C. & Aguzzi, A. (1998). PrP expression in B lymphocytes is not required for prion neuroinvasion. Nature Medicine 4, 14291433. McKinley, M. P., Bolton, D. C. & Prusiner, S. B. (1983). A protease-resistant protein is a structural component of the scrapie prion. Cell 35, 5762. Oesch, B., Westaway, D., Walchli, M., McKinley, M. P., Kent, S. B., Aebersold, R., Barry, R. A., Tempst, P., Teplow, D. B., Hood, L. E. & Weissmann, C. (1985). A cellular gene encodes scrapie PrP 2730 protein. Cell 40, 735746. Prusiner, S. B. (1982). Novel proteinaceous infectious particles cause scrapie. Science 216, 136144. Prusiner, S. B. (1991). Molecular biology of prion diseases. Science 252, 15151522. Prusiner, S. B., McKinley, M. P., Bowman, K. A., Bolton, D. C., Bendheim, P. E., Groth, D. F. & Glenner, G. G. (1983). Scrapie prions aggregate to form amyloid-like birefringent rods. Cell 35, 349358. Riesner, D., Kellings, K., Post, K., Wille, H., Serban, H., Groth, D., Baldwin, M. A. & Prusiner, S. B. (1996). Disruption of prion rods generates 10-nm spherical particles having high _helical content and lacking scrapie infectivity. Journal of Virology 70, 17141722. Sailer, A., Bueler, H., Fischer, M., Aguzzi, A. & Weissmann, C. (1994). No propagation of prions in mice devoid of PrP. Cell 77, 967968. Will, R., Cousens, S., Farrington, C., Smith, P., Knight, R. & Ironside, J. (1999). Deaths from variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Lancet 353, 91579158. Will, R., Ironside, J. W., Zeidler, M., Cousens, S. N., Estibeiro, K., Alperovitch, A., Poser, S., Pocchiari, M., Hofman, A. & Smith, P. G. (1996). A new variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in the UK. Lancet 347, 921925. Williams, A. E., van Dam, A. M., Man, A. H. W. K., Berkenbosch, F., Eikelenboom, P. & Fraser, H. (1994). Cytokines, prostaglandins and lipocortin-1 are present in the brains of scrapie-infected mice. Brain Research 654, 200206. S. Brandner and others Exp. Physiol. 85.6712