5625$$$CHA Amazon River Meggers, B. (1991). Amazonia: Man and culture in a counter- feit paradise. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press. Moran, E. (1993). Through Amazonian eyes: The human ecol- ogy of Amazonian populations. Iowa City: Iowa Univer- sity Press. Roosevelt, A. (1991). Moundbuilders of the Amazon. San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Schmink, M., & Wood, C. (1984). Frontier expansion in Am- azonia. Gainesville: Florida University Press. Amazonia, Ancient As the largest tropical rain forest on the planet, Ama- zonia holds a unique place in both world environmen- tal history and the imagination of South America. A vast region that extends through present-day Brazil and seven other South American nations (Colombia, Ecuador, French Guiana, Guyana, Peru, Surinam, and Venezuela) it symbolically stands for the dominance of nature over humans and as a source of still-unknown plants and animals. But in fact Amazonia has been an intensively managed, human-made environment for many hundreds of years. The current perception of Amazonia as one of the last wildernesses reflects not the rain forests pristine nature, but rather the erasure of its human population through the violence of the colonial conquest of the native population. Conventionally, the Amazon River basin is consid- ered, at a minimum, to comprise 96 million hectares; the Amazon River itself is the largest (by volume) in the world, being nearly 160 kilometers wide at its mouth. The civilizations that arose there were func- tionally isolated from the rest of the world, and this has meant that evidence for these past civilizations has emerged only slowly, given the absence of stone-build- ing and the sheer scale of the Amazon as a context for research. Any definition of Amazonia as an ecological, cul- tural, or political unit therefore tends to proceed more by a process of exclusion than by reference to broad uniformities in the Amazonian environment because such uniformities are illusory. The definition of Ama- zonia employed here reflects the conventions estab- lished in Stewards Handbook of South American Indians (19461963) and carried over into current anthropolog- ical usages, whereby Amazonia is understood to com- prise the whole of the Amazon River drainage system, 48 5625$$A001 05-05-03 14:30:05 including the right-bank tributaries of the Orinoco, to which the Amazon River has two connections: one per- manent (via the Casiquiare Canal) and one seasonal (via the flooding of the upland savannas between the Rio Branco and the Essequibo River). This latter con- nection effectively unites the Atlantic coastal region of the Guianas with the Amazon River basin, giving rise to the designation Guayana or Guianas (in Stew- ards Handbook) for this area encircled by the Atlantic, Orinoco, and Amazon, which can then be considered as a subregion of Amazonia, as defined earlier. Stew- ard (19461963, III, 885) also hypothesized that Guiana was a center of dispersal for the tropical forest-com- plex of agriculture of the manioc planta tuber whose pulp became a staple of the regional dietal- though this view was later challenged. However, it should be noted that these conventions in the geographical criteria for the delimitation of re- gions were connected to a wider classificatory scheme in the Handbook. In an attempt to give some analytical shape to the mass of ethnological, historical, and ar- chaeological information that the Handbook brought to- gether, these contrasting geographical zones were also thought to delineate cultural regions. As Robert Lowie put it in his introductory essay to Volume III of the Handbook, The Tropical Forest complex is marked off from the higher Andean civilizations by lacking archi- tectural and metallurgical refinements, yet outranks cultures with the hunting-gathering economy (Lowie 1948, 1). Accordingly, the Andean and Colombian- Venezuelan regions, fitting their status as the locale of the Incan empire and other gold-working chiefdoms of the Circum-Caribbean and Colombia sierras, were assigned advanced sociocultural status on the basis of cultural traits, such as hierarchical organization, metalworking, burial practices, and so forth. Because these cultures lay outside the agriculturally poor re- gion of the tropical forests of Amazonia, their complex and large-scale character was accepted as a logical re- sult of an environment conducive to the development of human civilization. A Counterfeit Paradise In the Amazonian region, any evidence of advanced civilizations was rejected by archaeologists and histori- ans as the exaggeration of an unreliable historical record or as a result of extraneous origins, the result of cultural diffusion from the Colombian or Andean regions. The evidence was dismissed because of the assumption that the Amazon region was ecologically Amazonia, Ancient unfavorable to human settlement on a large scale, de- spite its dense vegetation andvariety of faunait was a counterfeit paradise (Meggers 1992). The evidence for this was taken to be the poverty of soils away from the flood plain deposits, the small scale of contempo- rary indigenous societies, and the absence of major ar- chaeological sites, except in the case of the mound builders of Marajo Island at the mouth of the Amazon. The presence of this sophisticated culture was ex- plained as having resulted from a down-river migra- tion from a more complex center in the Peruvian or Colombian Andes. The apparent decline of this cul- tural complex, almost from the point of its establish- ment on Marajo, was then taken as proof that higher sociocultural forms could not sustain themselves in the lowland tropics where manioc agriculture was prac- ticed. In contrast, other experts championed the idea of the Amazon basin as a cradle of migration across the rest of the continent, a view supported by a significant proportion of recent research. Whether or not Amazonia was, or is, in fact a counterfeit paradise, therefore, remains at the heart of scholarly dispute. Because there have been insuffi- cient archaeological data to resolve this dispute, histo- rians and ethnographers have added their voices to the debates on native ecology and agriculture, demogra- phy, and population levels. The eventual outcomes of such research are of profound significance in answer- ing questions not just about human-environmental re- lationships, but also about the place of Amazonia in the overall development of New World society and culture. Early Settlement It transpires that human occupation of Amazonia is much more ancient and more extensive there than had once been assumed. By about 9000 BCE two lithic (using stone tools) traditions had become widespread in Am- azonia. (These stone implements included arrowheads and edged cutting tools for processing animal game and grindstones for preparing maize.) By 5000 BCE two more practices had emerged. First, there is evidence that by 2000 BCE groups on the Atlantic coast were using domesticated plants, with maize use emerging in the Minas Gerais region by about 1500 BCE. Second, current research indicates that occupation of the lower Amazon began around 10,000 BCE, and there has been a dramatic discovery of ceramics from around 6000 BCE in a site along the lower Amazon, making this the earliest example of pottery in the Americas. 49 5625$$A001 05-05-03 14:30:05 Close examination of this early period in northeast- ern Amazonia, along the Guiana coastal region, illus- trates the close relationship between agricultural adap- tation to a complex environment and a resultant development of appropriate lithic technologies. Tran- sitions from gathering to the horticulture of certain plants, particularly the ite palm (Mauritia flexuosa) and the mora tree (Mora excelsa), as well as other utilitarian species, are directly reflected in the development of the lithic repertoire. Although these subsistence tech- niques are theorized as being ancestral to the emer- gence of tropical forest horticulture in the region, the developmental analogies are probably stronger with the sambaqui (shell-mound) peoples of coastal Brazil than with the occupants of the tropical forests because their horticultural and foraging repertoires are quite distinct. This suggests that progressive adaptation to the complexities of the Amazonian environment was a process repeated across the whole region. Various ancient societies also practiced relatively intensive forms of agriculture, evidenced by wide- spread landscape modification throughout Amazonia. In fact, it has been argued that the landscape of Ama- zonia, as it is seen today and as it has been for the last 350 years or so, is the historical product of a return to a semiwilderness consequent on the colonial depopu- lation of the native inhabitants. Moreover, the current evidence for the existence of prehistoric roads and causeways in both the llanos (prairies) of Bolivia, Col- ombia, and Venezuela and in the heart of Amazonia itself indicates that these landscape modifications were related to the presence of large and complex societies. For example, recently investigated systems of ex- tensive ridged fields and agricultural mounds along the Atlantic coast of the Guianas underline how limited knowledge of the tropical forest region really is. The presence of complex agricultural techniques to deal with the low-lying, swampy conditions in this region, as well as the use of intensive farming practices from at least 700 CE, shows how complex adaptations were made to the variety of Amazonian environments. Thus archaeological evidence also fits well with the histori- cal sources that report both significant population and a complex agricultural repertoire among the indige- nous groups. Soil Holds Clues Apart from this physical manipulation of the land- scape, research interest in ancient Amazonia has fo- cused on anthropic or anthropogenic soils (that is, soils Amazonia, Ancient whose formation is directly related to human activ- ity)or at least on trying to assess what kind of soils in Amazonia may have been generated through human activities, how widespread they actually are, and to what extent such soils were intentionally fomented. The banks of the main channel of the Amazon as well as of many of its tributaries are replete with black earth sites, illustrating both the continuity and antiquity of human presence. The use of such sites for agricultural purposes thus illustrates both sophisticated knowl- edge of soil properties and systems of agricultural management that were stable over many generations. These kinds of soils, particularly terra preta (black earth), which is black anthropogenic soil with en- hanced fertility due to high levels of soil organic matter and nutrients, are common throughout Amazonia. (The valuable soil has been created either through di- rect agricultural fertilization or as a consequence of intense human settlementhuman waste materials en- rich the soil with nitrogen.) The historical evidence shows that there was no one-to-one relationship be- tween the presence of agriculturally favorable soils and the past existence of complex polity or an extensive cultural repertoire. This investigation of anthropogenic soils by scientists seems to provide evidence that human occupation of an area was not dependent on conducive environmental conditions. However, ar- chaeological investigation of the many well-docu- mented terra preta deposits along the main Amazon channel, as well as along its tributaries, is still in the early stages. Agriculture and Diet The addition of maize to modes of subsistence that previously centered on palms and manioc, as well as the systematic exploitation of other food plants, has also been the subject of tudy. However, interest in the advent of maize cultivation results from seeing maize use as a token of social and cultural complexitygiven its easy storage and high nutritional valueand so evi- dence of its use in Amazonia, where the use of manioc varieties is predominant in the historic and ethno- graphic reports of aboriginal horticulture, is especially significant. However, this apparent predominance of manioc agriculture in ethnographic and historical ma- terials about Amazonia may result from the way in which manioc use increased over the last five hundred years as a result of indigenous access to steel tools via trade with the Europeans. The use of steel axes would have permitted much greater clearance of forest for the 50 5625$$A001 05-05-03 14:30:05 forest of manioc, a root that must be dug from the earth, than would have the use of stone axes. As a result, and also stimulated by European trading inter- est in manioc flour, there were distinct advantages for domestic groups in opting out of the systems of inten- sive agricultural production that sustain large civiliza- tions. Consequently the dietary use of manioc, as op- posed to maize, may well have increased substantially during the historic period. Basic Questions Remain The nature of these transformations over the last five hundred years is critical to an understanding of ancient Amazonia, but the sheer size of the region and the lack of sociocultural continuity between past and present society and culture, as a result of colonial depopula- tion, make comprehensive study of the environmental history of the region especially challenging. Many of the basic questions of Amazonian prehistory remain open, not least of which are those of the scale and lon- gevity of human occupation. It seems likely that eth- nography and history, as much as archaeology, will continue to play a role in the discussion of human ad- aptations to the Amazonian environment., mean that. Work in progress that emphasizes ethnoarchaeological techniques, systematic survey, and interpretation of historical records, as well as the deployment of new technical resources, such as geophysical survey, seems well positioned to do justice to the complexity of Ama- zonian antiquity. As these techniques are deployed and the database grows, it already seems likely that issues of human environmental adaptation will be cast in a different framework to that which produced the idea of Ama- zonia as some kind of false paradise whose apparent botanical bounty belied the actual poverty of its soils for human usages. Already much of the work there tends to suggest that Amazonia is too complex an envi- ronment, and its human adaptations too various, to be adequately characterized as either utterly unfavorable or uniformly conducive to human settlement. The very uncertainties about the definition of an Amazonian re- gion, discussed earlier, reflect the fact that the concep- tualization of Amazonia as a homogeneous entity is in itself flawed. As debates about models of the Amazo- nian environment are replaced with actual investiga- tion of human adaptations through time, researchers will be in a far better position to appreciate the variety and complexity of human adaptation to both the chal- Andes lenges and the potential of the Amazon basin proper, as well as of the surrounding regions. Neil L. Whitehead See also Amazon River; Brazil Further Reading Acuna, C. de. (1859). A new discovery of the great river of the Amazons. In C. R. Markham (Ed.), Expeditions into the valley of the Amazons (pp. 44142). London: Hakluyt Society. Denevan, W. (2002). Cultivated landscapes of native Ama- zonia and the Andes. New York: Oxford University Press. Lowie, R. (1948). The tropical forests: An introduction. In J. Steward (Ed.), Handbook of South American Indians: Vol. 3. The tropical forest tribes (pp. 157). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. Meggers, B. (1992). Amazonia: Real or counterfeit para- dise? The Review of Archaeology, 13(2), 2540. Posey, D., & Balee, W. (Eds.). (1989). Resource manage- ment in Amazonia: Indigenous and folk strategies. In Advances in economic botany (7). New York: New York Botanical Garden. Roosevelt, A. C. (1980). Parmana: Prehistoric maize and man- ioc subsistence along the Amazon and Orinoco. New York: Academic Press. Roosevelt, A. C. (1991). Moundbuilders of the Amazon: Geo- physical archaeology on Marajo Island, Brazil. New York: Academic Press. Steward, J. H. (Ed.). (19461963). Handbook of South Ameri- can Indians (Vols. 16). Washington, DC: U.S. Govern- ment Printing Office. Whitehead, N. L. (1994). The ancient Amerindian polities of the lower Orinoco, Amazon and Guayana coast: A preliminary analysis of their passage from antiquity to extinction. In A. C. Roosevelt (Ed.), Amazonian Indians from prehistory to the present: Anthropological perspectives (pp. 3354). Tucson: University of Arizona Press. Whitehead, N. L. (1996). Searching for paradise? Recent research in Amazonian archaeology. Journal of Archae- ological Research, 4(3), 241264. Andes The environmental history of the Andes has unfolded in the context of a spectacular natural diversity and 51 5625$$A001 05-05-03 14:30:05 notable cultural achievement. The Andes form a com- plex of mountain ranges in western South America that extend 7,000 kilometers from Venezuela to Tierra del Fuego. Few people have lived in the southern Andes, where conditions make it difficult to sustain human life. In contrast, the portion of the Andean Highlands that lie within tropical latitudes have fertile valleys and sharply telescoped vertical habitats that have favored agricultural diversification over short distances. Prehistoric Andean peoples domesticated a wide range of plants, of which the potato is the best known, permitting a sedentary form of life that goes back to at least 4000 BCE. The consolidation of local societies into larger polities started around 1000 BCE. At a much later time, the Inca Empire (c. 11001532 CE) absorbed people of different cultures into an intricately organ- ized state apparatus based on sustainable farming and the raising of llamas and alpacas. At different periods, pre-Colombian peoples constructed earthworks that dramatically reshaped certain landscapes. Stone bench terraces on steep slopes enabled crops to be irrigated with little loss of soil to erosion. Elsewhere, systems of artificial ridges made it possible to grow crops in swampy terrain. In 1532 the Spaniards conquered the Inca empire and introduced most of the inventory of European crops, animals, technology, religion, and po- litical organization. Native people of the Andes long resisted wholesale absorption into Spanish culture. To this day, the highland peasantry reflects a mixed heri- tage of indigenous and introduced folkways. The Andes manifest both continuity and disconti- nuity from their pre-Colombian past. Highland defo- restation is the most visible human impact, but the bulk of the tree cover had already been removed by or in the Inca period. Colonizing Spaniards stripped most remaining woodland to meet the increased demand for firewood and house timbers and to accommodate the grazing needs of cattle, sheep, goats, and equines. The fortuitous introduction of eucalyptus after 1860 pro- vided an alternative wood supply, although planta- tions of exotic species have created vulnerable mono- cultures of one kind of tree that also have taken massive quantities of water out of the soil. The contemporary Andean landscape must be seen as a product of human interventions in the past, not as a simple response to biophysical factors. Desertifica- tion, especially severe in Bolivia, reflects overgrazing, not climatic change. Soil erosion and water pollution are not recent, but are of growing severity. Unre- strained cultivation of steep slopes and negative effects of mining on streams continue to take their toll on land