Boulders and Lights: Guides to an insidious World Four thousand years of navigation aids in the Mediterranean 1 Before the first lighthouse It is generally considered that the first lighthouse was the Alexandria Pharos, built around 280 BCE on the island that gave it its name. The Pharos was a marvel of the ancient world. At about one hundred and twenty metres in height it was the tallest lighthouse ever built. At times it was defended as a fortification with hundreds of inhabitants and probably had ramps all the way up to the light to facilitate carrying the necessary wood for the nightly flame to be maintained. In view of the extraordinary characteristics of the Pharos, it is necessary to ask if such a structure really was the first lighthouse ever made. Surely, there must have been other older structures that helped to define the role of a lighthouse in the way we know it today? The P'wunt ships were typically twenty five metres long and transferred goods from the Horn of Africa to Egypt and the Mediterranean over 4000 years ago. Their cedarwood sewn planks were up to 25 cm thick. Long before that, the world had been colonized by homo sapiens, who originated in Ethiopia and migrated all over the world via the seas and oceans. Our ancestors became a race of skilled seafarers with an obvious desire to make dangerous sea journeys as safely as possible. Min du Desert, replica of the African P'wunt ships The temple at Cape Sounion in Greece is 2600 years old. Dedicated to Poseidon, the God of the Seas, it stands on the extremity of the long Attica peninsula at the southeast entrance to the port of 1 Athens. Experts believe it was frequently lit at night and it is logical to assume that it was used by mariners to give offerings to Poseidon for a safe return to port. Located thus, it is also well suited as an indicator of a dangerous promontory and must have been used as a navigational aid both by day and by night. It gives a strong hint that Greeks used religious structures to assist mariners. Similarly a Phoenician drawing from the 4th century BCE depicts a light on a tower, and Phoenician temples are known to have been erected on strategic promontories, as at Wardija on Gozo near Malta. Etruscans at Gravisca and Pyrgi (meaning a bonfire in Greek) had lit temples. The Catania Ongia island temple was later called pharos, or lighthouse. A fire purposely left lit at night by a family awaiting the return of men at sea was a situation likely to have been repeated along coasts over for many millennia, and it seems that the first structures that fulfilled the role of ancient lighthouses are likely to have been temples or tombs. Temple of Poseidon, Cape Sounio, near Athens, Greece Pharos, Alexandria. A 2005 rendering 2 On the Greek island of Thasos two structures of similar design cast their shadow over the last rocky outcrops at sea. The tomb of Akeratos in particular, which dates from the 5th century BCE, has a dedication indicating that it was erected for the safety of those at sea. Was this a wealthy family's monument in loving memory of a member deceased at sea, offered for the safety of many others? It was most likely a lighthouse indicating the presence of a safe harbour. Others have, to no avail so far, tried to identify the site of Achille's Pillar, a structure that would have indicated the tomb of the great Greek warrior. Used by day and night for similar acts of dedication, it would have acted as a de facto lighthouse indicating safe access to the Hellespont some 3200 years ago. Akeratos' tomb lighthouse, on a high point; the second structure on Thasos, on a promontory 2 Eight ancient leading lights proposed 1) The Torre de Hercules at La Corua, in Galicia, Spain, is the oldest working lighthouse in existence. It was erected by the Romans around 40 CE, possibly on the exact site of an earlier Carthaginian structure. Its refurbishment and elevation by the Catalan Crown, in the late 17th century ended its role as a leading light. Satellite views show it was located neither on the most prominent promontory nor in the best spot to indicate access to port, but to warn of the dangers of the treacherous and low-lying islands of El Portino off the access to the port of La Corua. A dangerous path towards the rocks was indicated by the disappearance of the light behind the high ground of the promontory. The reappearance of the light meant the direction was clear. This idea of using a disappearing light to indicate the presence of danger preceded a British system known as a sectored light whereby the usual white warning light from a lighthouse was seen to be red when a ship was sailing into danger. The change of functionality caused by increasing the height of the light at La Corua obliged its renovators to add a thin pillar aimed exactly in the direction of the El Portino islets thus restoring its original function. The pillar, until now, hides the light when the El Portinos are approached. Torre de Hercules, La Coruna, Spain. Its emplacement from googleearth 3 Detail of its guiding light feature 2) The structure known as Nero's lighthouse in Pattara, Turkey is placed in a most illogical site for a lighthouse. It appears to have been built too far inland for it to indicate a safe route to a local port. In spite of its clear resemblance to the Pharos, many have doubted that it was ever a lighthouse. We propose that it is in fact an example of an ancient guiding light, a principle devised and implemented by the Libophoenicians and copied by the Romans. It is perfectly placed to guide incoming ships toward Pattara and its coasts, ensuring they stay clear of the Catals, a string of three islands that form a hazard to navigation and are hard to distinguish as separate from the coast in the background. Nero's lighthouse, Pattara, Turkey 4 Pattara tower emplacement, as a guiding light to avoid the Catal islands 3,4) Gallinara in Liguria, Italy is also a hotspot of dangers to navigation. Since 1950, a number of very significant ancient shipwrecks have been found in its vicinity. Two towers, of identical size and appearance stand in the exact spot on opposite sites of the Albenga Gulf, apparently to indicate the presence of this dangerous island. Examination of their locations shows that they would have functioned as leading lights that disappear as the island, indistinguishable from the coast at night, is mistakenly approached. They have so far been locally identified as Phoenician windmills, a hypothesis which we propose to be incorrect. However, no archaeological study or other research has been made to clarify the role of these two structures. Interestingly, the tower in Colla Micheri was the retreat of the father of experimental marine archaeology Thor Heyerdhal. He used to meditate and write into the night, at the light of a petrol lamp, in the structure I believe was an ancient lighthouse. He duly rests in its shadow. Kon Tiki, Thor's raft, reached Raroia, French Polynesia from Callao, Peru in 1947 5 The twin towers of Colla Micheri and Verezzi, Italy. Their perfect emplacement as lights guiding off Isola Gallinara 5,6) The two Roman lighthouses at Dover and Boulogne functioned on the two sides of the English Channel. We propose that they were guiding lights on a direct route across the Channel. The one in Boulogne (Gesoriacum) was built earlier, in view of the Invasion of the British Isles. Both were completed before 48 CE. The one in France is totally lost, while the one in Dover stands, thanks to its later use as a church bell tower. 6 A model of the Boulogne (Gesoriacum) lighthouse from the Turin Arte Antica Museum (B. Giardina); the Dover lighthouse 7,8) A Roman lighthouse in Messina town stood as a guide across the Messina straits. The Cape Peloro Roman Lighthouse, whose base has recently been recovered, had a similar use, when sailing North across the straits, while it indicated the NE point of Sicily and the Messina Narrows. Cape Peloro, the Roman lighthouse excavation site. Siding the English Tower medieval fort 7 The Messina Straits and the two towers' emplacement 3 Boulders to set a route, or assert dominion: a hypothesis Three unusual massive boulders have been identified at Cape Gallo. There are indications that at least one has been moved and supported by stones placed at its base. Satellite views suggest its top may have been modified to sustain a structure or an implement. Their alignments point quite precisely to the Ustica and Lipari islands. Viewing them in line would have set a voyager on course, gaining time and profiting from coastal breezes to gain favourable seas. A light shown on the highest boulder might also have indicated the presence of Isola delle Femmine that, if it was not a common site of shipwrecks was nevertheless a danger to passing ships. It could also have acted as a leading light by disappearing behind a promontory. The three boulders at cape Gallo as route indicators to Ustica and Lipari islands 8 The three boulders seen orthogonally from Googleearth The main Phoenician settlement at Mozia island may also have been an earlier port manned by Bronze Age master mariners. It was conveniently placed in a closed bay and was joined to the shore by an underwater man made causeway. On the route from the mouth of Mozia bay to the Phoenician Eolian islands, and further to Cape Gallo, to the mentioned islands off it, and to mainland Esperia or Tyrrenian Italy, stands Isola Grande. In its north at the point nearest to Favignana Island, two tall Menhir-like stones appear to indicate the exact route to the closest southeast tip of Favignana. The island is actually less than four nautical miles from the rock installation. It would be easily seen by day unless in bad weather or in the presence of sea mists. We might suppose that the boulders were at the very least route indicators. They could also have been assertions of presence and control of the relevant sea route. Likewise, they may have been sites where offers and demands for a safe return would be performed, as at the Phoenician temple cave at Gibraltar, or the temples on promontories, or other places of worship of the Sea Gods. The rationale of these boulder alignments, starting from those in Tunisia-Carthage I am to describe here -the probable origin of all similar structures- is giving route directions by day, gaining up to a dozen hours in the trafficked and competitive trade life of the Phoenicians and Carthaginians. An answer to a practical problem: how to know the direct course before night time and sighting the circumpolar stars, to use the constant and convenient land breezes to set sail? In my opinion, stars would have guided the positioning of the boulders, in sufficiently moon lit nights. I believe the other possible option, sighting the islands from the promontory, has two flaws. First directing the movements of many men around the boulders from the top of cape Gallo on a rare day in which Ustica may be seen was totally unpractical, it lies four hundred metres above, second Lipari is impossible to sight from the cape promontory, unless its volcano is erupting! 9 Isola Grande Menhirs Isola Grande menhirs as guides to Favignana On the tip of Cape Bon, Tunisia a further three boulders, yet unstudied, appear to indicate the route to Mozia and to the southwest tip of Sardinia. Of special note is that on the La Galite island NW shores two existing rock outcrops show possibly manmade slits that, when aligned from the sea, point to the same tip of Sardinia as those of Cape Bon. The route to the most significant iron ore source of the period, Isola d'Elba. We are aware of other sites where there may be artificially aligned boulders that may indicate other ancient sea routes. 10 Cape Bon and La Galite potential indicators Four boulder array proto-lighthouse systems, in Tunisia and Sicily. Pointing to Carthaginian routes and dominions Cadiz, Carthaginian colony. The lighthouse as depicted near the theatre, in a Roman Garum factory 11 A Punic temple in Ras il Wardjia, Gozo, Malta, indicated by Ken Trethaway as another potential proto-lighthouse 4 Research Proposal Based upon a new and increasing body of evidence concerning techniques of early navigation and the use of newly identified aids to navigation, we hereby propose a programme of research to improve our understanding. Visits should be made to Sicily and Tunisia where the proposed structures at Cape Gallo, Isola Grande in Sicily the northwest shore of La Galite and Cape Bon in Tunisia. Visitors should be accompanied by an archaeologist with experience of megaliths. Photographs must be taken from a boat offshore to determine the visibility of the stones from the sea. If positive evidence is found for the presence of artificial structures, i.e. moved or worked boulders, a visit should be followed up with a formal archaeological and historical investigation. This should include a search for nearby temporary shelters, and thermoluminescence and other measurements carried out adjacent to and on rock surfaces on which fires may have been lit. The twin towers indicating a sight line to Isola Gallinara should also be carefully studied by archaeologists. 5 Conclusions Ancient Pharology is so far a controversial science based on few facts and even fewer finds. New archaeological evidence will greatly help the science integrating it into much better geographical and historical reconstructions of the sea routes off North Africa and the Mediterranean. Over a time span from the late Bronze age to after the beginnings of the Roman domination of the seas, 146 BCE, date of the destruction of Carthage in Africa and Corinth in Greece. The new research will contribute to increased understanding of the navigation methods and trade routes of Bronze age seafarers, Phoenicians and Carthaginians, Greeks, Etruscans and Romans. Sharing, much like today's mariners, vital technical knowledge, and dividing routes. Understanding the presence of precise trade sea routes will increase the possibility of finding important shipwrecks by greatly reducing the search areas. Until now, shipwreck location via sonar seabed scans has been guided by intuition, the presence of ports of call, or dangerous tract of seas. Never had research indicated precisely one, let alone as now, a number of ancient sea routes. Their correct definition from point of departure to port of arrival or to a set tract of coast potentially makes research much simpler and enormously less costly. This both in terms of shorter routes indicated by the eight guiding lights here described, and of entire crossings directed by the proto-lighthouses of antiquity we are proposing for further research. marco vigano', A.A. University, 12/12/16 12 Boulders and Lights: Guides to an insidious World 1 Before the first lighthouse 2 Eight ancient leading lights proposed 3 Boulders to set a route, or assert dominion: a hypothesis Cape Bon and La Galite potential indicators A Punic temple in Ras il Wardjia, Gozo, Malta, indicated by Ken Trethaway as another potential proto-lighthouse 4 Research Proposal 5 Conclusions